     AGREEMENT

        between the




       [BTU LOGO]




BALTIMORE TEACHERS UNION
  AMERICAN FEDERATION
  OF TEACHERS, LOCAL 340
         AFL-CIO

           AND

 BALTIMORE CITY BOARD
          OF
 SCHOOL COMMISSIONERS



        -
        2021-2023




             1
                                                                 -
PREAMBLE

This Agreement is entered into effective the 1st day of July, 2021, between the Baltimore City
Board of School Commissioners and the Baltimore Teachers Union, American Federation of
Teachers, Local 340, and reduced to writing in accordance with Sections 4-301, 4-304 and 6-408
of the Education Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.

ARTICLE I

Recognition

1.1 Recognition
The Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
recognizes the Baltimore Teachers Union pursuant to the Annotated Code of Maryland, as the
employee organization which is duly elected and certified exclusive representative of the Board’s
employees who are in the professional educational public school employee unit. The Board further
recognizes the Baltimore Teachers Union as the employee organization authorized to administer
the Agreement.

1.2 Unit Members
Whenever used in this Agreement, the term “Employee” shall mean all classroom teachers (pre-
K-12), counselors, librarians (and/or their successor job title and/or classification), psychologists,
social workers, home and hospital teachers, department heads, master teachers, academic coaches,
instructional associates, instructional support teachers, educational associates, speech-language
pathologists, audiologists, occupational therapists, physical therapists, facilitators, consulting
teachers, IEP Team Associates, pupil personnel worker, teacher – mentor, teacher – staff
developer, and art, music and physical education resource teachers.

The term “Employee” shall also refer to any person hired for the unit by BCPSS who is required
by State Law to hold a professional license or certification from the Maryland State Department
of Education but who does not hire, terminate and/or evaluate other employees.

1.3 Part Time Employees
All permanent part-time employees covered by this Agreement shall receive full insurance
benefits. Leave benefits shall be accumulated on a pro-rata basis. Salary benefits shall be calculated
on a pro-rata basis related to hours worked.

1.4 Temporary Employees
A temporary employee excluded from the bargaining unit is one who is hired for a period of up to
six (6) months and is so informed in writing at the time of hire and who is hired to fill a temporary
job or for a special project or to replace any employee on leave.


1.5 Definitions
Where used in this Agreement, the following definitions shall apply:
                                                  2
“School” shall usually mean any work location or functional division or group.

“Principal” shall usually mean the administrator of any work location or functional division or
group who has direct responsibility for supervising members of the bargaining unit.

“Building Representative” shall mean the officially designated agent of the Union in any work
location or functional division or group.

The term “Board” and/or “BCPSS” shall include the Baltimore City Board of School
Commissioners or its designated representatives.

The term “Union” shall mean the Baltimore Teachers Union or its designated representative.

The term “Teacher” shall refer to all members of the bargaining unit unless otherwise indicated.

“Clinicians” shall include all psychologists, social workers, speech-language pathologists,
occupational therapists, physical therapists and audiologists.

“Union Chapter Committee” shall mean the five (5) employees elected by the Union
membership in each school.

“Emergency” used in this agreement shall mean any unforeseen situation of which the party (s)
had no prior knowledge.

“System-wide seniority” is based upon the length of continuous service as calculated from the
date of appointment as a full-time teacher in the Baltimore City Public School System. Continuous
service includes all time spent in the actual employment and on the payroll of the Board including
all authorized paid leave time. Time spent on any approved leave of absence without pay or on
layoff status up to two (2) years from the date of layoff shall not be considered a break in
continuous service for the purpose of seniority status. However, the actual time spent on the
approved leave or on layoff status shall not be counted in the employee’s seniority.

“Second endorsement” shall mean an additional certification in a subject area other than the one
for which the employee is presently assigned.

“CEO” wherever used in this agreement is understood to mean the Chief Executive Officer or his
designee.

“School Oversight Committee” whenever used in this Agreement shall refer to the team in
designated schools responsible for planning and implementing the changes in rules,
responsibilities and relationships among its staff as the school carries out its educational program.

“Department Heads” work with department personnel in planning and coordinating department
instructional programs for maximum educational benefits to the students.

“I.E.P. Team Associates (ITAs)” are school based staff members who report to the principal and
who work with students with disabilities.



                                                 3
“Conditional Teacher” shall mean an employee who holds a conditional teaching certificate as
issued by the Maryland State Department of Education.

“Baltimore Professional Practices and Student Learning Program (BPPSLP)” is the program
developed by the Board and the Union to encourage teacher and staff leadership, give teachers and
staff decision making responsibilities and reward teachers and staff for the valuable work they do.

“Career Pathways” are called Standard, Professional, Model and Lead.

“Interval” is the term used to describe movement on the pay scale within a Career Pathway.

 “Achievement Units (AUs)” describe the knowledge and skills that are necessary for an educator
to move up the new pay scale.

 “School-Based Options (SBO)” is a process by which certain schools may vote to modify
selected sections of Article VII, limited to 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, and 7.8.

“Tenure” is the expectation of continued employment by the Board after completing a probationary
period that is governed under the terms of the Regular Teacher Contract set forth in COMAR and
Education Article Sections 6-201(f) and 6-202.



ARTICLE II

Union Rights and Responsibilities

2.1 Union Leave
Any employee elected as an officer of the Union or who is appointed to the Union’s staff shall,
under proper application, be given leave of absence without pay. Any employee who is elected as
an officer of the Union shall, upon proper application, be given a leave of absence with pay for the
term of his/her office subject to the Union's prompt reimbursement on a monthly basis for all costs
incurred by the Board for the Union officer's complete pay and benefits as they currently exist and
as such pay and benefits may be modified during the course of the Union officer's term of office.
The Board agrees to recommend to the Teachers’ Retirement Board that time spent on leave be
granted as service credit for retirement and that the employee be permitted to pay regular monthly
contributions. Upon their return to service, they shall be placed in an assignment comparable to
that which they left. The employee shall be granted salary credit and seniority for up to six (6)
years spent on leave working for the Union. Such leave shall not be granted for more than seven
(7) persons in any one (1) year.

To avoid a possible break in service, or a loss of benefit amount, BCPSS shall permit the Union at
Union expense under the law to purchase service credit for bargaining unit members on Union
leave.

2.2 Transaction of Official Business
Duly authorized representatives of the Union shall be permitted to transact official Union business
on school property at all reasonable times, provided that this shall not interfere with or interrupt
normal school operations. Upon their arrival, they shall apprise the principal or school staff
assigned to the office of their identity and purpose.

                                                 4
2.3 Union Meetings
Upon one day’s notice to the administrator of the school, an authorized representative of the Union
shall have the right to schedule meetings in the building before or after regular duty hours or during
the lunch time of the employee(s) involved, or during the rescheduled day when employee(s) are
not assigned to, nor involved in other duties. The notice requirement may be waived by the
principal involved.

2.4 Union Communications
The Union, as exclusive representative, shall have the use of the school system’s interdepartmental
mail and email facilities, the right of distribution of materials to teachers’ mailboxes in schools,
and the use of bulletin board space, provided these rights do not interfere with the operation of the
school system. Individuals and organizations other than the Union shall not be permitted to use the
school system’s interdepartmental mail and email facilities, or the right of distribution of materials
to teachers’ mailboxes.
The Union shall have space on at least one existing bulletin board in each school. Said bulletin
board space shall be located in the teachers’ lounge unless another site is mutually agreeable to
both parties. The Board shall place a link to the Union’s website on the home page of the School
System’s website.

2.5 Board Communications
The Board shall supply the Union with notification, through City Schools Inside, of all Board
Policies and Regulations, press releases, all CEO’s Memoranda and Bulletins including online
posting on the school system’s website, relating to employees generally or to any substantial group
of employees concerning the interpretation or application of the terms and conditions of this
Agreement and/or relating to wages, hours, or conditions of employment. All task force reports
submitted to the Board in public session, including the purpose and membership of said task force,
shall also be supplied to the Union.

2.6 New Employee Access
      A. Definition. “New employee processing” means the process by which newly hired
         bargaining unit employees, whether in person, online, or through other means, are
         advised of their employment status, rights, benefits, duties, responsibilities, and other
         employment matters. In any year in which the district holds a New Teacher Institute of
         at least one day prior to the first day of school, “new employee processing” shall include
         the New Teacher Institute.

       B. The Board shall provide the Union with 10 days’ notice in advance of a new employee
          processing. However, the Board may provide the Union with less than 10 days’ notice
          if there is an urgent need critical to the Board’s new employee processing that was not
          reasonably foreseeable.


       C. Within 30 days of the date of hire, or by the first pay period of the month after the date
          of hire, of each new bargaining unit employee, the Board shall provide the Union with
          the employee’s name, Employee Identification Number, date of hire, date of birth,
          position classification, pathway, interval, home and work site addresses, where the
          employee receives interoffice or United States mail, home, work site, and personal cell
          phone numbers, and work email address. The Board shall provide the information in
          the preceding sentence regardless of whether the newly hired employee was previously
          employed by the Board.
                                                  5
       D. The Union shall provide the Board with the email address to which the Board shall
          send the notices and information required above.
       E. The Board shall provide the Union with the information described in paragraph C for
          each employee in the bargaining unit once every 120 days.

2.7 Dues Checkoff
A. The Board agrees to deduct Union dues from the pay of any employee in the unit who
authorizes such deduction in writing. Such authorization shall be continued from year to year
unless revoked in writing between June 1 and June 30. With respect to all dues deducted by the



                                                                           -
Board pursuant to such authorization, the Board agrees to remit said dues to the Union bi-weekly.
The Board shall, within (30) days of the Union’s and the Board’s ratification of the Agreement,
make all changes necessary to its human resources management system to ensure that no employee
is dropped from dues checkoff due to a change in assignment or location. The Board shall supply
the Union with a monthly computer payroll printout showing those teachers for whom dues have
been deducted.
B. The Union shall indemnify and save the Board harmless of any and all claims, grievances,
actions, suits or other forms of liability or damages that arise out of or by reason of any action
taken by the Board for the purpose of complying with any of the provisions of this section, and the
Union assumes full responsibility for the disposition of the funds deducted under this section as
soon as they have been remitted by the Board or its designee.

2.8 Equal Representation
As exclusive representative, the Union will represent equally and to the best of its ability all
members of this bargaining unit without regard to membership in, or participation in the activities
of the Union.

2.9 Exclusivity
The rights set forth in this Article are for the exclusive use of the Union and shall not be granted
to any other group or organization. Only the Baltimore Teachers Union shall be recognized or
permitted to represent any group of teachers concerning wages, hours, or conditions of
employment.

2.10 Area Representatives’ Leave
Upon advance request and approval by the appropriate administrator, four (4) area representatives
shall each be allowed three (3) days per month with pay in order to conduct Union business.
Request for such leave shall be made at least five (5) days in advance.

2.11 Building Representative Announcements
Upon prior notice to the appropriate administrator, the Building Representative may make
announcements after the conclusion of any faculty meeting.

2.12 Seniority List
A list specifying the system-wide seniority of each member of the bargaining unit shall be prepared
and forwarded to the Union within thirty (30) days following the last day of the school year. On
or before August 1 of each year, BCPSS shall furnish the Union a list containing the name, home
address and work location assigned for the next school year for any teacher who is transferred or
assigned to a new work site for the next school year.



                                                 6
2.13 Tenure and Loss of Tenure Notification
The Board agrees that all teachers or other certificated employees in the unit represented by the
Union shall be presented with either a Regular Contract or a Provisional Contract. Beginning
October 1, 2021, any teacher or other certificated employee who earns or loses tenure shall receive
a written or electronic communication from the Board notifying tenure has been granted or lost
within twenty (20) school days of the end of the month during which tenure was earned or lost.

On October 1 of each year, the Board shall provide the Union with a list of all tenured and non-
tenured employees. For non-tenured employees who hold a professional certificate, the list shall
include the projected date on which they will earn tenure.



-
2.14 Requests for Records re: Wages, Hours, Conditions of Employment
Upon request and availability, the Board shall provide the Union with statistics and/or records
relating to wages, hours and conditions of employment. Any costs involved in the preparation of



-
said information shall be paid for by the Union.

2.15 Committee on Political Education (COPE) Deductions– Political Action Check-off
The Board agrees to deduct from the pay of each employee from whom it receives an authorization
to do so, the monthly amount authorized by the employee for political action. A list of the
employees from whom the deductions have been made and the amount deducted from each, and a
list of the employees who had authorized such deductions, shall be forwarded to the Union no later
than thirty (30) days after such deductions were made. The authorization form shall read as
follows:
   “I hereby authorize the Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners to deduct from my
salary the bi-weekly sum of $ __________ and to forward that amount to the Baltimore Teachers
Union Political Committee. This authorization is signed freely and voluntarily and not out of any
fear of reprisal and with the understanding that the Baltimore Teachers Union Political Committee
is engaged in joint fundraising efforts with the AFL-CIO. This voluntary authorization may be
revoked at any time by notifying the Board of School Commissioners and Baltimore Teachers
Union Political Committee in writing of the desire to do so.”
(Signed)___________________________________________________(Name)
________________________________________________________(Address)



-
_____________________________________________(Identification Number)

2.16 Building Representative Leave
    A. Provided instructional services will not be diminished and with advanced approval of the
       Building Principal , BTU Building Representatives shall be released for up to once (1)
       period per week to conduct Union business. To accommodate this provision, Building
       Principals in the secondary schools may consider releasing Building Representatives from
       homeroom assignments, and in elementary schools may consider using one (1) additional
       resource period or the assignment of a paraprofessional.

   B. Management, recognizing the important role a Building Representative plays in the
      schools, accordingly will make every effort to avoid the transfer of any elected Building
      Representative.



                                                7
   C. The Union will supply the Office of Labor Relations a list of Building Representatives and
      any changes, as changes occur.




-
   D. The Office of Labor Relations shall not reproduce or distribute this list to anyone.

2.17 Building Representative Assignment
Effective July 1, 2000, no employee who has been a Building Representative for more than three
(3) years of continuous service in a particular school shall be reassigned involuntarily out of that
school to another work location. This provision notwithstanding, BCPSS may transfer a Building
Representative if for just cause consistent with Sec. 16.5 of this Agreement, a reduction in force
or a special circumstance related to proven employee misconduct. No Building Representative for
more than three (3) years of continuous service in a particular school shall be transferred solely as
a result of the adoption of this section. There shall be no involuntary reassignment of a Building
Representative without the written approval of the CEO. If there is a negative change in a Building
Representative’s evaluation, it shall be reviewed by the CEO. Each Building Representative shall




-
receive 3 AUs per year for being a Building Representative.

2.18 Union Liaison
The Board shall appoint at least two (2) BCPS union liaisons to facilitate the movement of union
issues.

ARTICLE III

Management Rights

3.1 Management Rights
The Union agrees that the Board has and will continue to retain, whether exercised or not, the right
to operate and manage its affairs in all respects, and the powers of authority which the Board has
not officially abridged, delegated or modified by the express provisions of this Agreement are
retained by the Board. Notwithstanding any provision of this Agreement, the Board reserves the
right to make all employment decisions necessary to comply with federal and state laws.

ARTICLE IV

Grievance and Arbitration

4.1 Objective
It is the declared objective of the Board and the Union to encourage prompt resolution of
grievances. The Board and the Union recognize the importance of prompt and equitable
disposition of any complaint at the lowest organizational level possible.



4.2 Definition
A grievance is a violation, misapplication or misinterpretation of any provision of this Agreement
or of a policy of the Board of School Commissioners which affects the terms and conditions of
employment.

4.3 Procedures
Step 1: School or Office
                                                 8
An employee shall present his complaint orally to the appropriate administrator, within ten (10)
school days after knowledge by the employee of the facts giving rise to the act or condition which
is the basis of the complaint. The employee, or his representative, and the administrator shall
confer with the view of arriving at a mutually satisfactory resolution. All matters, whether or not
they meet the definition of a grievance as defined in Section 4.2, may be discussed at this stage.

The administrator shall render a written decision which shall be communicated to the employee or
Union representative within five (5) school days of the conference. Only grievances as defined in
Section 4.2 may be pursued to Step 2.

Step 2: Appropriate Executive Director or designee
If the dispute is not resolved at Step 1, the grievant may appeal by forwarding in writing to the
Executive Director of Elementary/Middle or Secondary Schools, as appropriate, or next
appropriate supervisor, in writing within five (5) school days after he has received the Step 1
decision.

The Step 2 administrator shall schedule a meeting with the parties concerned within seven (7)
school days of the receipt of the appeal at which time the aggrieved employee shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard. The Step 2 administrator shall issue a written decision within five (5)
school days after the meeting.

Step 3: CEO
The Step 2 decision may be appealed in writing to the CEO within five (5) school days after the
Step 2 decision has been received.

The CEO, or his designated representative shall meet with the aggrieved employee within ten (10)
school days of the appeal. The aggrieved employee will receive at least two (2) school days notice
of the meeting and shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. The CEO, or his designated
representative, shall communicate his written decision to the aggrieved employee not later than
ten (10) school days after the meeting.

Step 4: Board of School Commissioners
The Step 3 decision may be appealed in writing to the Board within five (5) school days after the
Step 3 decision has been received. The Board, sitting as a whole, by committee, or by designee,
shall hear the grievance within fifteen (15) school days following receipt of the appeal and shall
render its decision not later than ten (10) school days following said hearing. The Board, at its
option, may waive Step 4, in which case the Union may press the matter to arbitration.

Step 5: Arbitration
Within ten (10) days following receipt of the Step 4 decision, the union may move any unresolved
grievance to arbitration by notifying the Board in writing of its intention to do so. Thereafter either
party may request the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service to provide a list of seven (7)
arbitrators who each are members of the National Academy of Arbitrators, FMCS Maryland Sub-
Regional or Regional Area. An arbitrator shall be chosen by alternately striking names from the
list, with the last name remaining being the arbitrator chosen. The decision of the arbitrator shall
be final and binding on all parties to the arbitration.

The arbitrator shall be without power to add to, subtract from, change or alter any provision of the
Agreement, Board Policy or of applicable State or local law. The Arbitrator shall confine himself
to the precise issue submitted for arbitration and shall have no authority to determine any other
                                                  9
issues nor shall he submit observations or declarations of opinion which are not essential in
reaching the determination.

The arbitrator shall not hear or decide more than one (1) grievance unless mutually agreed
otherwise.
The cost for the services of the arbitrator, including per diem expenses, if any, and actual and
necessary travel and subsistence expenses, will be borne equally by the Board and the Union.


4.4 Time Limits
A. Except for Step 1, time limits shall begin for both parties upon the day after receipt of the
    grievance or the day after receipt of the response.

B. To avoid any disputes as to the date of submission or receipt of a grievance, appeal, decision,
   or notice of hearing, all notices of hearings and/or decisions shall be mailed by school officials
   by certified or registered mail return receipt requested, with the date of mailing or postmark
   and the date of receipt recorded thereon. As an option, such correspondence may be hand
   delivered but must be signed, timed, and dated by the receiver.

C. By mutual agreement in writing, time limits may be extended.

D. Failure at any step of this procedure to communicate the decision on a grievance within the
   specified time limits shall permit the aggrieved employee to proceed to the next step. Failure
   to submit a grievance within the specified time limits or to appeal a grievance to the next
   successive step or to arbitration within the specified time limits shall be deemed to be a waiver
   of the grievance and/or acceptance of the decision rendered at that step.

E. In the event a grievance is filed after May 15 of any year, which, if left unresolved until the
   beginning of the following school year, could result in irreparable harm to a party in interest,
   the time limits set forth herein will be reduced so that the grievance procedure may be
   exhausted prior to the end of the school term or as soon thereafter as is mutually agreeable to
   the parties. All other grievances filed on or after May 15 will be considered at a time mutually
   agreeable to the parties, but no later than the beginning of the next school term.

F. If a grievant fails to appeal a decision at any level within the prescribed time limit, he shall
   have been deemed to have waived further processing of that grievance.

4.5 General Provisions
A. Hearings held under this procedure shall be conducted at a time and place which will afford a
    fair and reasonable opportunity for all participants to be present.
B. Meetings are to be scheduled at mutually convenient times. Attendance by an aggrieved
    employee or employee witnesses at grievance meetings held during school hours shall
    constitute authorized absence without loss of pay. Either party may have such witnesses or
    persons in interest in attendance as the party shall deem necessary.
C. The Union shall have the right to initiate or appeal a grievance at any step of the grievance
    procedure. Only the Union may appeal a grievance to the Board and to Arbitration.
D. If a grievance arises from the action of an authority higher than a Step 1 administrator, such
    grievance may be initiated at the next appropriate step of the grievance procedure.



                                                 10
E. Any grievance not commenced under the provisions herein stipulated within eighteen (18)
   school days after the grievant knew (or should have known) of the conditions upon which such
   grievance is based shall be null and void.
F. No reprisals of any kind shall be taken by the Board or the School Administration against any
   teacher because of his participation in this Grievance Procedure.
G. The administration shall furnish the Union with such information that is requested which is
   directly related to the grievance.
H. If a grievance affects a group or class of teachers, the Union may submit such a grievance in
   writing to the CEO directly and the processing of such a grievance will begin at Step 3.


4.6 Grievance Forms
The grievance shall be filed on the mutually agreed upon grievance form which shall contain the
following information:
Name and position of the aggrieved employee;
A statement of the grievance and the facts involved, including relevant dates;
A reference to the applicable provisions of the Board Policy, if any;
The corrective action requested;
Signature of the aggrieved employee; and,
Date and time submitted.

4.7 Joint Grievance Meeting
A. Once each month, the Labor Relations Associate, and any other representative(s) of BCPSS
    that the CEO and/or Board may find appropriate, shall meet with the Union President(s) to
    discuss specific grievances which are pending at Steps 3, 4, & 5.
B. Should it become apparent at a Joint Grievance Meeting conducted under Sec. 4.7.A. that
    BCPSS and the Union shall be unable to agree on how a particular grievance is to be resolved,
    the Union may advance the grievance directly to arbitration at Step 5, without first completing
    either Step 3 or 4. Notice of an intent to arbitrate a particular grievance that has been discussed
    shall be given in writing within five (5) days after the Joint Grievance Meeting; if notice is not
    given, then the grievance shall proceed through the steps of the grievance procedure before
    being submitted to arbitration.

ARTICLE V

Compensation and Related Matters

5.1 Compensation

Wage Rates

A.

     1. The salary schedules effective July 1, 2020 shall be increased by 2.25% on July 1, 2021.



        ---
        The salary schedules effective July 1, 2021 shall be increased by 2.25% on July 1, 2022.
        Supplemental salary scales remain in effect and shall be increased by 2.25% on July 1,
        2021 and 2.25% on July 1, 2022, e.g. coaches, clinicians, department heads, etc. fiscal year.

     2. Timeline of Compensation Increases.


                                                  11
       The salary adjustments in paragraph A.1. shall be implemented retroactive to July1, 2021
       no later than twenty (20) business days after ratification of this Agreement by the Board of
       School Commissioners. In fiscal year 2023 the salary adjustments in paragraph A.1. shall
       be implemented by no later than July 1, 2022.

B. It is a goal of the Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners and the BTU to support
   salary levels for teachers comparable to competitive area districts. Adjustments to the salary
   schedule for future years shall be determined by the following methods:
   1. A list of districts shall be identified and current salary schedules obtained from these
        districts.
   2. Benchmark positions are the minimum and maximum positions on each lane of the
        schedule.
   3. The benchmark positions shall be averaged for all districts in the sample.
   4. The Board will cooperate with BTU requests for revenue or expenditure estimates.
   5. Once implemented, the schedule shall remain in effect until modified through subsequent
        agreements.
C. In addition to their annual salary new teachers shall receive $35 per hour in school year 2021-
   2022 and $36 per hour in school year 2022-2023 for required attendance during the orientation
   week prior to the opening of the school year.
D. There shall be no pyramiding of stipend differentials or adjustments to base wages, or salary
   schedules for any new class or group of employees. For new classes or groups of employees,
   where more than one rate applies, the highest stipend, differential or adjustment will be paid.
   This provision will apply in its entirety only to new groups and classes of unit employees.
E. Persons transferring from any Paraprofessional Salary Scale to the Teachers’ Salary Scale shall
   be given credit for salary scale placement at the rate of one interval for every two years service
   as a Paraprofessional with a maximum of five intervals.
F. If a bargaining unit member resigns in good standing from BCPSS after at least five (5) years
   of service and is rehired within three (3) school years, that bargaining unit member shall be
   placed on no lower than the Pathway and Interval that they were on when they left BCPSS
   service, except that a teacher who was on the Model or Lead pathway when they left BCPSS
   service and who is rehired within three (3) school years shall be placed on the Professional
   Pathway at Interval 15.
G. New Hire Salary Placement
   All new bargaining unit members shall be placed on the proper step of the salary schedule
   according to their certification, experience, and education, as detailed in the chart below.


      Standard      Bachelors      Masters Professional       Bachelors      Masters      Ph.D. or
      Pathway        (years)       (years)  Pathway            (years)       (years)        Ed.D.
                                                                                           (years)

           1            0-1                           1          10-11          6-7         0-1
           2            2-3                           2          12-13          8-9         2-3
           3            4-5          0-1              3          14-15          10          4-5
           4            6-7          2-3              4          16-17          11          6-7
           5            8-9          4-5              5          18-19          12          8-9
                                                      6           20+           13         10-11
                                                      7           N/A           14         12-13



                                                 12
                                                     8          N/A           15         14-15



                                                      9         N/A            16          16
                                                     10         N/A            17          17
                                                     11         N/A            18          18
                                                     12         N/A            19          19
                                                     13         N/A            20          20
                                                     14         N/A           21+         21+

H. Stipend Rate and Summer Pay

All work performed for stipends and summer pay shall be paid at the rate of $50.00 per hour in
fiscal year 2022 and at a “workshop” rate of $40 per hour for attending professional development
which is not subject to a different rate as a part of an SBO or MOU. These rates shall be increased
for FY23 by the same percentage cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) that is agreed to in paragraph
(A)(1) above for FY23 salaries for bargaining unit members.

Baltimore Professional Practices and Student Learning Program (BPPSLP)

5.2     The Board and the BTU believe that the BPPSLP has encouraged teacher and staff
leadership, given teachers and staff decision making responsibilities and rewarded teachers and
staff for the valuable work they do.

Career Pathways

Career Pathways are called Standard, Professional, Model and Lead. Interval is the term used to
describe movement on the pay scale within a Career Pathway. Each Career Pathway has a number
of intervals. Achievement Units (AUs) describe the knowledge and skills that are necessary for
an educator to move up the new pay scale. When educators accumulate 12 AUs they move one
interval along a Career Pathway.

The BTU and the Board will continue to develop and facilitate the various components of the
BPPSLP and create a research base and body of evidence upon which the Program will improve
professional practices, increase student learning, and increase career acceleration and
opportunities.


A. Joint Oversight Committee

There shall be a Joint Oversight Committee to provide oversight of all planning development and
implementation of the BPPSLP. The committee will be composed of 10 members, 5 appointed by
the Board and 5 appointed by the Union which shall include the CEO, the BTU President, and
their designees, which must meet within 30 days of ratification of the Agreement. The committee
will, among other things:
    • Define the full scope and objectives of the BPPSLP
    • Assess the needs of the district for programs needed by students and the capacity of the
        professional staff to meet those needs


                                                13
   •   Identify educational and professional activities that need to be engaged in by staff,
       evaluated for effectiveness, and to serve as a basis for compensation decisions
   •   Create and oversee a system for ensuring reliability and validity of evaluations conducted
       by principals including, but not limited to observations of teaching to ensure inter-rater
       reliability.
   •   Determine whether there are worksites that have experienced significant change in the
       proportion of teachers receiving lower evaluations as compared to the previous school year.
       If so, an investigation shall be conducted including the examination of the evidence used
       in reaching the decisions. The investigation shall be conducted by representatives
       appointed by the CEO and the President of the Union.
   •   Create and oversee the process to select members to Professional Peer Review committees,
       designate their responsibilities, and provide general operating oversight of their work
            o Teachers will apply to the President of the BTU consistent with the application
                process developed by the Joint Oversight Committee to serve on Peer Review
                committees.
   •   If necessary, create subcommittees including but not limited to a subcommittee to ensure
       that peer reviewers are within the same subject area and grade-level configuration (e.g.
       elementary, middle, and high school).
   •   Review and affirm the administrative and infrastructure capacity of the system and certify
       that the program is ready for implementation
            o The infrastructure must provide the ability for teachers to view all data related to
                quality control and be integrated into the registration process for Achievement




                                     -
                Units (AUs)
   •   Certify that the district has the resources to implement and sustain this program
   •   By no later than March 31, 2023, recertify that: 1) the district has the administrative
       capacity to implement the BPPSLP, 2) the district has developed an infrastructure to
       implement the BPPSLP, and 3) standards related to implementation, systems of support,




                                              -
       and professional context including teaching and learning conditions have been adopted by
       the Joint Oversight Committee. If the Joint Oversight Committee does not so recertify, the
       BPPSLP shall terminate on March 31, 2023, and the contract shall be reopened for a cost
       of living increase on the then existing pay scale.

B. Joint Governing Panel

There shall be a Joint Governing Panel (“JGP”) composed of 4 members, 2 appointed by the Board
and 2 appointed by the Union. The Joint Governing Panel will:
   • Adopt an AU development process consistent with standards for systems of support,
       professional development, and professional learning communities which include
       evaluation systems to determine their effectiveness based on multiple measures that
           o Provide a continuum of teacher support based on a teacher's ability to meet teaching
               standards and the career stage of the teacher
           o Are aligned with the professional teaching standards
           o Focus on teachers' work with students
           o Use and are informed by teacher evaluation data
                                               14
             o Are intensive and ongoing
             o Give teachers a say in improving the system based on regular and timely feedback
             o Engage with ideas and colleagues as part of the normal workday
     •   Develop a menu of AUs for educators in all content areas and grade levels including the
         following categories:
             o Professional development activities;
             o Contributions to student learning;
             o Contributions to colleagues; and
             o Overall contributions to the school and district.
     •   Assign AU coordinators to help teachers accumulate AUs.
     •   Assign teachers who are currently BTU learning reps who will help teachers navigate the
         promotion process to move to Model and Lead Pathways.




         - -
     •   Implement a system to track teachers’ accumulation of AUs
     •   Continue to develop a menu of AU opportunities. Any AUs accumulated from July 1,
         2021 to June 30, 2023 will be banked and applied in increments of 12 (an interval). Any
         AUs remaining in the bank when pathway movement occurs shall remain in the bank on
         the pathway in which they were earned.
     •   Continue to develop a rubric for movement to Model and Lead Pathways to be used by the
         Professional Peer Review Committee to evaluate the scope and impact of professional
         practice
     •   Assist the SBO waiver process and implementation

C.       Career Advancement

     •   Standard, Professional, and Model teachers represent the classroom career
     •   There shall be no limit on the number of teachers placed in the Standard, Professional or
         Model Pathways
     •   Lead Teacher is a promotional opportunity.
     •   Interval movement within all Pathways requires 12 AUs, which may be earned in a number
         of ways, including:

     AUs may be earned in the following manner:

            o Professional Activities in the following categories:

                    ▪   Professional development activities;
                    ▪   Contributions to student learning;
                    ▪   Contributions to colleagues;
                    ▪   Overall contributions to the school and district;
                    ▪   Other approved AUs




                                           - -
            o Eligible coursework (e.g., in pursuit of certification, recertification, etc.)
              accumulated from July 1, 2021 to June 30, 2023 will be converted to AUs.

                    ▪
                    ▪
                        One college credit equals one AU.
                        Unit members seeking initial certification shall not be eligible for AUs for
                        coursework.

                                                  15
•   AU Credit for Annual Evaluation

       o Highest rating on Evaluation ( Proficient or Highly Effective) = 12 AUs
       o Second highest or middle rating on Evaluation (Satisfactory or Effective) = 9 AUs
       o Any rating above Unsatisfactory or lowest rating (Developing) that requires support
         or intervention = 3 AUs
       o Failure of Principal to Issue an Annual Evaluation within contractual time limits
         Results in an Effective Rating
       o If the CEO places an employee on mandatory Administrative Leave with pay for a
         period of time that results in the failure of the issuance of an Annual Evaluation the
         individual shall receive no lower than an Administrative Satisfactory/Effective
         rating on his Annual Evaluation.

•   An employee may move from Standard Pathway to Professional Pathway by either
    transitioning through the highest interval within the Standard Pathway, or approval by the
    Professional Peer Review Committee.

•   For an employee to move beyond the Professional Pathway to Model or Lead teacher he
    or she must obtain approval by the Professional Peer Review Committee.

•   For promotion into the Lead teacher Pathway, a teacher will be placed into a pool of eligible
    candidates by the Professional Peer Review Committee. Principals will then interview the
    first five candidates by date of entry into the pool and content area.


       o Supplemental salary schedules remain in effect, and increased by COLAs, e.g.
         coaches, clinicians, department heads, etc.

•   Continual differential across all Pathways

•   Movement for teachers at the top of the Scale in Professional, Model and Lead Pathways
    and Longevity

       o Longevity payments based on accumulation of 24 AUs shall be provided in the
         amount of 1% of current salary.
       o Teachers will receive a 1% increase in salary upon earning recertification.

•   Movement for Related Service Providers who are at the top of the scale
      o Effective July 1, 2018 Related Service Providers (RSP’s) who are at the top of the
         scale in a Pathway and hold a license in lieu of a certificate will receive 1% increase
         once every five (5) years by providing a copy of their current valid license to the
         Human Capital Office. The process for RSP’s will follow the process timeline for
         certificated members of the bargaining unit using either July 1 or January 1 as the
         eligibility effective dates for submission of proof of licensure.
      o RSP’s who were at the top of the scale as of July 1, 2018 will be eligible to submit
         their license to receive the 1% increase retroactive to July 1, 2018. In addition,
         RSP’s who moved to the top of the scale between July 1, 2018 and December 31,
                                             16
                   2018 may provide their valid license to receive the 1% increase effective January
                   1, 2019. The Office of Human Capital will provide a list of current RSP’s who are
                   eligible to receive this increase.

    D. Model and Lead Teachers

    Model and Lead teacher status shall be reviewed every five years.

    If the Model teacher has a Developing or Ineffective rating he or she shall remain on the Model
    pathway and shall retain their current pay level but shall not be eligible for interval movement until
    he or she has proficient/highly effective evaluations for 3 out of 5 years.




                                -
    E. Evidence of Success

    By no later than March 31, 2023, the Joint Oversight Committee must certify that a research base
    and body of evidence upon which the BPPSLP concept has improved professional practices,




                                                                                     -
    increased student learning, and increased career acceleration and opportunities as evidenced by
    increased interval and Pathway movement and lead teacher placement. If the Joint Oversight
    Committee does not so certify, the BPPSLP shall terminate on March 31, 2023, and the then
    existing pay scale shall be converted into a traditional salary scale based upon steps and lanes with
    no loss of salary or benefits.

5.3 Health and Welfare Related Matters

    A. Health Insurance

       1. The Blue Cross/Blue Shield Preferred Provider Network (“PPN”) in effect during the 2015-
       2016 school year shall continue in effect.

       2. For those employees in the Blue Cross/Blue Shield Preferred Provider Network (“PPN”),
       81.5% of the actual premium shall be paid by the employer and 18.5% shall be paid by the
       employee. Employee co-pays for office visits shall be $5.00 for primary physician and $10.00
       for specialists. Commencing January 1, 2019, for those employees in the Blue Cross/Blue
       Shield Preferred Provider Network (“PPN”), 81% of the actual premium shall be paid by the
       employer and 19% shall be paid by the employee. Commencing January 1, 2019, employee
       co-pays for office visits shall be $10.00 for primary physician and $20.00 for specialists.


       3. The Board shall provide a prescription drug benefit plan for employees and eligible
       dependents enrolled in health benefit plans offered. Generic substitutes shall be mandatory,
       unless the employee’s or eligible dependent’s treating physician determines that a brand drug
       is medically necessary. Employee cost (co-pay) of the drug prescription will be $10.00 for
       generic drugs, $15.00 for brand drugs, and $30.00 for non-preferred drugs and a monthly
       premium cost to employees of $4.20 (10 months only) through December 31, 2019, and,
       effective January 1, 2020, $16.80 (10 months only). A single co-pay of $10.00 for generic
       drugs, $15.00 for brand drugs, and $30.00 for non-preferred drugs shall be charged for a ninety
       (90) day fill either at the pharmacy or through optional mail order.

       4. Employees covered by this Agreement are eligible for a Health Maintenance Organization
       (“HMO”) alternative to the Blue Cross/Blue Shield PPN coverage. The employer shall
                                                     17
  contribute the same dollar amount it contributes for the employee’s current Blue Cross/Blue
  Shield PPN coverage. The employer share of the premium for HMOs and the Blue Cross/Blue
  Shield Point of Service (“POS”) shall be 95% and employee share of the premium shall be 5%.
  Commencing January 1, 2019, the employer share of the premium for the HMOs and Blue
  Cross/Blue Shield POS shall be 94% and the employee share of the premium shall be 6%, plus
  $5.00 for individuals, $10.00 for two persons, and $15.00 for families per pay.

  5. The employer shall provide the additional health and welfare benefits of Blue Cross/Blue
  Shield second surgical opinion, alcoholism treatment programs and a hospice care program for
  employees. The employer, Union, and Provider will work together to provide a booklet of
  health care benefits for unit members, except as provided in 5.2.A.1
  6. An employee shall be entitled to a Hospital Bill Audit Gainsharing payment of 33 1/3 %
  of an overpayment (or other billing error resulting in an overpayment to the health care
  provider), up to a maximum of $500 to the employee for each incident. In order to qualify for
  the Gainsharing payment, the employee must: (i) identify an overpayment of more than $250
  (in the aggregate) in a hospital bill that is presented to an employee or his or her dependent;
  and (ii) notify the BPCSS Office of Benefits Management of the error within 30 days after
  receipt of an Explanation of Benefits from the Health Plan. Payment shall be due and made
  only if the error is verified, and the amount overpaid actually is recovered to the Board’s
  benefit.
  7. Eligible dependents under the age of 26 shall be covered by BCPSS Health Plans, General
  Prescription Drug, and Vision Care Programs.



  8. Medical and Prescription Drug Schedule of Benefits

     A detailed listing of benefits can be found in the health plan comparison chart distributed
     during annual open enrollment. No benefit available through December 31, 2016 shall be
     discontinued because it is excluded from the table which follows:

     Preferred Provider Network
     Summary of Benefits
    Commencing January 1, 2019

Plan Feature                    In-Network                       Out-of-Network
Employee Annual Deductible      None                             None
Co-insurance                    100% of allowed benefit (no      80% of allowed benefit (no
                                service restrictions)            service restrictions)
Employee Annual Out-of-         $400                             $2,000/individual
Pocket Maximum (excludes                                         $4,000/family
mental health)
Lifetime Maximum Benefit        Unlimited                        Unlimited
Inpatient Hospital (facility    100%                             $100 deductible, 80% up to
and doctor charges)                                              $1500               out-of-
                                                                 pocket/admission

                                              18
Outpatient Hospital (facility   100%                              80% of allowed benefit
and doctor charges)



Emergency Care in a Hospital    $50.00 co-pay by employee;        $50.00 co-pay by employee;
                                waived if admitted to hospital;   waived if admitted to hospital;
                                Commencing January 1,             Commencing January 1,
                                2019, $100 co-pay with $10        2019, $100 co-pay with $10
                                copay for urgent care             copay for urgent care
Surgical Expenses               100%                         80%
Doctor’s Office Visits          $10.00 co-pay for primary 80% allowed benefit (no co-
                                physician, $20.00 co-pay for pay)
                                specialists
Preventive Care                 100% at one per year
  Routine physical + related                                      80% at one per year
services
  Gyn exam                      100% allowed benefit (no co- 80% allowed benefit (no co-
  Mammogram                     pay)                         pay)

All services
Well-Child Care                 100% allowed benefit              80% allowed benefit
Hospice                         100% allowed benefit              100% allowed benefit
Inpatient Mental Health         Pays same as medical              Pays same as medical
                                                                  Pays same as medical
Inpatient Substance Abuse       Pays same as medical
Outpatient Mental Health        Pays same as medical              Pays same as medical
Outpatient Substance Abuse      Pays same as medical              Pays same as medical


      Point of Service
      Summary of Benefits
        Commencing January 1, 2019


Plan Feature                    In-Network                        Out-of-Network
Employee Annual Deductible      $0.00                             $0.00




                                              19
Co-insurance                       90%                              70%



Employee Annual          Out-of-   $1,000/individual                none
Pocket Maximum                     $2,000/family
Lifetime Maximum Benefit           Unlimited                        Unlimited
Inpatient Hospital (facility 90%                                    70% of allowed benefit, pre-
and doctor charges)                                                 auth required
Outpatient Hospital (facility
                                   90%                              70% of allowed benefit
and doctor charges


Emergency Care in a Hospital       $100.00 co-pay by employee;      $100.00 co-pay by employee;
                                   waived if admitted to hospital   waived if admitted to hospital


Urgent Care                        $10 co-pay                       $10 co-pay


Surgical Expenses                  90%                          70%
                                   $10.00 co-pay for primary 70% of allowed benefit
Doctor’s Office Visits
                                   physician, $20.00 co-pay for
                                   specialists


Preventive Care
Routine physical + related         100% at one per year             $5 co-pay per visit, 70% of
services                                                            allowed benefit

Gyn exam                           100% at one per year             $10 co-pay per visit, 70% of
                                                                    allowed benefit
Mammogram                          Covered in full                  $10 co-pay per visit, 70% of
                                                                    allowed benefit


Well-Child Care                    Covered in full                  $5 co-pay per visit, 70%
                                                                    allowed benefit
                                                                    70% of allowed benefit
Hospice                            90%
                                                                    Outpatient: pre-auth required
                                   Outpatient: pre-auth required
                                   90%, pre-auth required           70% of allowed benefit, pre-
Inpatient Mental Health
                                                                    auth required
                                   90%, pre-auth required           70% of allowed benefit, pre-
Inpatient Substance Abuse
                                                                    auth required
Outpatient Mental Health                                            70% of allowed benefit

                                                20
                               $10 co-pay per office visit,
                               covered in full all other
                               services
Outpatient Substance Abuse     $10 co-pay per office visit, 70% of allowed benefit
                               covered in full all other
                               services



     Health Maintenance Organization
     Summary of Benefits



Plan Feature                           In-Network
Employee Annual Deductible             N/A
Co-insurance                           100%
Employee Annual Out-of-Pocket          Individual: $1,100
Maximum (excludes mental health)       Family: $3,600
                                       Includes mental and nervous coverage. The following
                                       services do not apply to out-of-pocket maximum:
                                       • Outpatient drugs, supplies, and supplements,
                                         including blood, blood products, and medical foods
                                       Inpatient and outpatient infertility services
                                       Unlimited
Lifetime Maximum Benefit
Inpatient Hospital (facility and       100%
doctor charges)

Outpatient Hospital (facility and      100%
doctor charges
Emergency Care in a Hospital           $100 co-pay (waived if admitted)

Urgent Care                            $10.00 co-pay per visit
Surgical Expenses                      100%
Doctor’s Office Visits                 $5.00 co-pay for primary physician, $10.00 co-pay for
                                       specialists
Preventive Care                        100% at one/yr.
  Routine physical       +   related
services
  Gyn exam                             100% at one/yr.
  Mammogram                            100% per schedule of freq.


Well-Child Care                        100%
                                              21
     Hospice                              100%
     Inpatient Mental Health              100%
     Inpatient Substance Abuse            100%;
     Outpatient Mental Health             $5 copay per visit
     Outpatient Substance Abuse           $5 copay per visit


9.      Dental Schedule of Benefits
       A detailed list of benefits can be found in the materials distributed during annual open
enrollment. No benefit available through December 31, 2016 shall be discontinued because it is
excluded from the table which follows:

          DHMO
          Summary of Benefits



    Plan Feature                                       Employee Co-pay - Network Only
    Preventive and Diagnostic Services
    • Examination                                      $0
    • Cleaning                                         $0
    • x-rays                                           $0

    Minor Restorative
    • Fillings and extractions                         $0
    • Oral surgery                                     $40-$196 based on specific service
    • Endodontic services1                             $45-$310 based on specific service
    • Periodontal services1                            $25-$145 based on specific service

    Major Restorative
    • Crowns                                           $92-$190 based on specific service
    • Bridges                                          $115-$291 based on specific service
    • Complete Dentures                                $249-$264 based on specific service

    Complete Orthodontics                              $1,850 co-pay

          DPPO “Buy Up” Option (Voluntary)
          Summary of Benefits

                                                       In Network/Out of Network
    Plan Feature

1
    Additional employee co-pay if approved specialist performs services.




                                                  22
      Class I (Preventative)                        100%/100%
      Class II (Basic/Restorative)                  80%/80%
      Class III (Major)                             60%/60%
      Class IV (Orthodontia - adult ortho is
      included)                              50%/50%
      Annual Deductible per Member (does not $50/$50
      apply to Class I services)
      Orthodontia Lifetime Max                      $1,500/$1,500


10.     Vision Schedule of Benefits
       A detailed listing of benefits can be found in the materials distributed during annual open
enrollment. No benefit available through December 31, 2016 shall be discontinued because it is
excluded from the table which follows:
       Vision Plan B
       Summary of Benefits

 Plan Feature                                       Participating / Non-Participating
 Exam                                               100%/$25.00
 Lenses
 • Single                                           100%/$20.00
 • Bifocal                                          100%/$33.00
 • Bifocal progressive                              100%/$40.00
 • Trifocal                                         100%/$47.00

 Frames                                             Retail allowance up to $70.00/$25.00
 Contact Lenses
 • Medically necessary                              100%/$135.00
 • Cosmetic, replace single vision lens             Retail allowance up to $45.00/$45.00
 • Cosmetic, replace bifocal lens
                                                    Retail allowance up to $45.00/$45.00
 Frequency for Benefit                              Exam + one pair of eye glasses or contact
                                                    lenses once every 24 months

Vision “Buy-Up” Option (Voluntary)
Summary of Benefits



 Plan Feature                                       Participating / Non – Participating
 Exam                                               100%/Reimbursed Up to $40
 Lenses
 • Single                                           100%/$41.50
                                               23
 •   Bifocal                                         100%/$67.00
 •   Bifocal progressive                             100%/$100.50
 •   Trifocal                                        100%/$89.50
 •   Lenticular                                      100%/$156.50

 Frames                                              Retail allowance up to $130.00/$29.50
 Contact Lenses
 • Medically necessary                               100%$135.00
 • Cosmetic, replace single vision lens              Retail Allowance up to $71.00/$71.00
 • Cosmetic, replace bifocal lens                    Retail Allowance up to $71.00/$71.00


 Frequency for Benefit                               Exam + one pair of eye glasses or contact
                                                     lenses once every 12 months


11.     All benefit programs available under this Sec. 5.2. shall be exempt from taxation as
ordinary income in accordance with I.R.C. Sec. 125 or successor provision of the Internal Revenue
Code.

12. The employer shall remit an annual payment of $650.00 (to be paid bi-weekly) to each
employee who, with satisfactory proof of alternative health insurance coverage received in another
plan, elects not to take any coverage under a BCPSS Health Care Plan. If, after waiving coverage
under any BCPSS Health Care Plan, the employee loses coverage due to the death of a spouse or
other person who is a source of coverage, divorce or loss of employment or deletion of benefits
(or such other qualifying event as determined by the Employee Benefits Division), the employee
may enroll in a BCPSS Health Care Plan and consequently relinquish the waiver payment. The
employee must notify the BCPSS Employee Benefits Division within 30 days after a qualifying
event occurs in order to enroll in a BCPSS Health Care Plan. The employer shall apportion the
payment should an employee either enter or leave a BCPSS Health Care Plan within a calendar
year.

13. The employer shall design and offer a High Deductible Health Plan with a Health Savings
Account starting in January 1, 2019.


B. Health and Welfare
1. The employer shall contribute not less than $400 to a health and welfare fund which shall
   consist of life insurance, optical services and dental insurance. The optical program will
   include fashion frames as allowed. The Board will pay $25 toward the cost of physical exams.
2. The employer shall provide life insurance of $70,000.00.
3. The Joint Health Insurance Committee, named by the Board and named by the Union shall be
   established to review and report on quarterly usage and cost reports provided by the health plan
   administrators. The committee shall also assist in analyzing and the development of the RFP
   that will be subject to the Board’s approval for the selection of plan administrators by the
   Board. This committee shall meet at least on a monthly basis and shall submit a quarterly
   report to the Board of School Commissioners. On a quarterly basis, the Health Insurance
   Program shall send to the Union all utilization, expenditures and financial data. The Board


                                                24
   and the Union shall begin to jointly develop and implement a jointly administered wellness
   plan by no later than November 1, 2017 for implementation by July 1, 2018.

4. In the event an employee eligible under the FMLA or military leave is on leave without pay
   for personal illness, the Employer shall continue to pay its share of the cost of Blue Cross/Blue
   Shield PPN, Blue Cross/Blue Shield POS and HMO coverage for a period not to exceed ninety
   (90) days, provided the affected employee continues to assume his appropriate contribution for
   said coverage.

5. A. The health insurance vendor shall be selected by the Board through the process of
   competitive bidding. The process of competitive bidding is based on updated RFP’s reviewed
   by the Union. Any health care vendor selected through competitive bidding must provide “At
   least the same level and type of benefit coverage” as provided under the 2013-2016 Agreement.

   B. In the event there is a dispute about whether “At least the same level and type of benefit
   coverage” is provided by any potential vendor, the following procedure shall be used to resolve
   that dispute:
       A tripartite panel including a representative of the Board, a representative of the Union,
       and a neutral third party that is acceptable to the Board and the Union shall, within five (5)
       working days of the declaration of a dispute, schedule a hearing(s) on this matter. The
       panel shall have fifteen (15) working days from the conclusion of the hearing(s) to issue a
       final and binding decision limited solely and exclusively to a determination of whether “At
       least the same level and type of benefit coverage” is provided by a potential vendor.

C. Joint Health and Welfare Labor Study Committee
1. The Prescription/Drug Program shall be considered a proper subject for the review.
2. In the event either the state or federal government pass legislation mandating all employers to
   participate in a national or statewide health care plan, it is agreed to by the parties to this
   Agreement that the employer contributions for the employees’ health care that were negotiated
   into the Agreement prior to the passage of such state or federal law shall continue to be a part
   of this Agreement, but they shall upon the effective date mandating participation in such state
   or federal law, first be applied to the premium cost of such plan, with any remaining amount
   to be used to purchase supplemental coverage for any items covered under the current health
   care plan.

5.4 Travel Allowance
The employer shall provide a travel allowance at the rate established and published by the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) to those employees who use their personal automobiles for approved
BCPSS business during the course of the work day.

5.5 Master Teachers, Department Heads, and Coaches
A. Master Teachers, Department Heads, and Coaches shall be compensated as set forth in their
    respective scales in the Addendums of this Agreement.
B. The Department Head of Physical Education responsible for Interscholastic Athletics shall be
    paid as a Department Head I and as a Director of Athletics.
C. If there is no department head of physical education responsible for Interscholastic Athletics,
    a procedure shall be developed by the Board and the Union to establish a list of employees
    who are qualified to fill Athletic Director positions. If a school qualifies by the number of staff
    for the position of department head, the department head and director of athletics shall be the
    same person.
                                                  25
   Currently employed department heads of physical education who are serving as Directors of
   Athletics shall be held harmless.


ARTICLE VI

Teacher Employment

6.1 Area of Assignment
In order to ensure that students are taught by teachers working within their areas of competence,
teachers shall not be assigned, except in accordance with regulations of the Bylaws of the Maryland
State Board of Education and, in an emergency, to subjects or classes outside the scope of their
teaching certificates, their major or minor fields of study or areas in which the teacher is not
prepared to teach.

6.2 Teacher Assignment
A. No later than thirty (30) days prior to the end of the school year, all teachers shall be given an
    opportunity to voluntarily fill out preference sheets indicating their preferences, in order of
    priority, of grade level and type of program on that grade level, with the understanding that
    where reasonably possible such preferences will be honored.

B. Not later than the last work day for teachers in June all teachers shall be given written notice
   of their assignments for the forthcoming year. Teachers shall be given an opportunity to discuss
   their assignments with their Principals. If the Principal proposes changes to the assignment
   which may include transfer to another school, --all teachers affected shall be notified promptly.
   Changes in teachers’ assignments later than the fifteenth day of August preceding the
   commencement of the school year shall be made only in an emergency situation. An
   emergency situation shall be defined as provided for in Article I, Section 1.5.

C. No change in assignment during the school year shall be made without ten (10) school days
   notice and discussion prior to the change.

D. Any assignment in addition to or in lieu of the normal teaching schedule, during the regular
   school year, shall not be obligatory but shall be with the consent of the teacher. Such
   assignments will be given to teachers regularly employed in the school system on a rotating
   basis.

6.3 Reduction in Force
A. In any reduction of educational personnel necessitated as a result of budgetary actions, or
     declining enrollment, educational personnel shall be laid off solely on the basis of certification
     in the subject field assignment, qualifications, and on system-wide seniority counted from the
     most recent date of employment. The employee with the least amount of seniority shall be
     identified for layoff. In addition, an individual employee’s second endorsement shall apply if
     the employee has teaching experience in the area of second endorsement and the Board has a
     need in a specific second endorsement subject area. A violation of this procedure only, may
     be the subject of a grievance. Decisions to layoff by the Board are not subject to the grievance
     procedure. Systemwide seniority shall be defined as per Article I, Section 1.5.



                                                  26
B. At least fifteen (15) days prior to finalizing the reduction in staff, the Board will meet with
   the Union to explain and discuss the proposed reduction. The Board will provide the following
   information:
                   1. A seniority list of all employees.
                   2. Statistics on attrition.
                   3. Information on certification.

C. The CEO and the Board of School Commissioners shall determine the areas in which recall is
   to take place and the number of persons to be recalled. Tenured teachers will be recalled first
   in reverse order of layoff. Non-tenured teachers will then be recalled. No teachers will be
   hired in areas where a layoff has occurred until the teachers laid off have been recalled, have
   declined, and/or failed to accept a recall. The right to recall shall expire two (2) years after the
   date of layoff.

D. At the time an employee is notified that he is to be laid-off, the Board shall advise him of his
   recall rights. Employees shall be recalled in reverse order of layoff. At the employee’s request
   the Board shall supply information which will help such employee to qualify himself in another
   area.

E. The Board shall notify surrounding district(s) of the layoff and that affected employees are
   available for employment.

F. The Board shall give each employee notice of recall either by certified or registered mail to the
   last known address supplied by the employee, and the employee must respond to such notice
   in some verifiable manner within fourteen (14) days after receipt thereof. If an employee fails
   to respond within the required time, the employee shall be deemed to have terminated his
   employment with the Board.

G. Any employee who has been laid off in accordance with the layoff procedures and is recalled
   shall be resumed to his position or a vacant position with all the rights and benefits due him
   prior to his layoff. This shall include, but not be limited to, seniority status and tenure.


ARTICLE VII

Teacher Hours and Working Conditions

7.1 School Year
 A. The Board shall determine the starting dates for new teachers and returning teachers for the
    school year after an evaluation of the prior school year and in consultation with the Union.

   Prior to the adoption of a final school calendar for a succeeding school year, a meeting will be
   scheduled with the union to allow an opportunity for input. At the beginning of the school year,
   at least the equivalent of one (1) full day in at least half day increments shall be guaranteed for
   teachers to prepare their room, with no meetings or other assigned responsibilities.

   1. The length of the school year shall be one hundred and eighty (180) days for students
   2. The length of the school year shall be a maximum of one hundred and ninety (190) days
      for teachers.

                                                  27
 B. There shall be two (2) breaks during the school year, each of no less than five (5) working
    days. One break shall be in the month of March or April or both. One break shall be in
    December.




7.2 School Week
    The school week for secondary teachers and those teachers in departmentalized and middle
    schools shall be in accordance with the following chart showing various scheduling options
    and except in cases where school faculties indicate otherwise, five (5) forty-five (45) minute
    duty-free lunch periods.

                       Teaching Periods per week                    Preparation
                                                                    Periods Per
                                                                    week

                    25 (8 period day)                             10
                    25 (7 period day)                             5
                    20 (5 period day)                             5
                    15 (4 period day)                             5

7.3 School Day
    A. The length of the school day shall be seven (7) hours and five (5) minutes inclusive of the
       arrival and departure time.
    B. The reporting time for elementary school and K-8 school teachers shall be fifteen (15)
       minutes prior to the time designated as the official homeroom period. The reporting time
       for high school and middle school teachers shall be ten (10) minutes prior to the time
       designated as the official homeroom period. In the event there is no homeroom period
       during the instructional day or there is no homeroom period, reporting time for elementary
       school and K-8 school teachers shall be fifteen (15) minutes prior to the beginning of the
       student instructional day and ten minutes for high school and middle school teachers.
       Leaving time shall be upon the completion of the teacher’s responsibility but in no event
       less than ten (10) minutes for elementary school and K-8 school teachers and no less than
       five (5) minutes for high school and middle school teachers after the conclusion of the
       instructional day.
    C. It is further agreed that the teacher will provide extra time either within or outside of the
       teacher’s school day for the benefit of the needs of his students as shall be determined by
       the teacher.
    D. For the purposes of leaves (i.e., sick, personal) a half-day of leave time shall be defined as
       three (3) hours and thirty-two (32) minutes minimum, from the start of or prior to the end
       of the work day.
    E. A joint committee composed of three (3) members appointed by the Board and three (3)
       members appointed by the Union shall meet within 30 days of the date of the ratification
       of this Agreement to address the additional salary payable to members of the bargaining
       unit for work performed beyond the 7 hour and 5 minute duty day and/or beyond the 190
       duty day school year at every Charter, Transformation, Innovation, New Schools
       Initiative, Turnaround School, Restart or any other newly created school that operates with
       an extended school day and/or extended school year. A specific Memorandum of


                                                 28
        Understanding for each such school shall be negotiated no later than August 15, of each
        school year.


7.4 Lunch Periods
Every teacher in the elementary and secondary school shall be entitled to a daily, duty-free,
uninterrupted forty-five (45) minute lunch period; but where the pupils have a regular lunch period
of less than forty-five (45) minutes due to modular scheduling, the duty-free period shall coincide
with such regular periods of less than forty-five (45) minutes. The above does not preclude the
right of individual faculties to shorten the lunch period so long as there is a minimum of three-
fourths (3/4) of the faculty in agreement with the arrangements as well as with the appropriate
adjustment of the time. The faculty vote will be by secret ballot. However, in no event shall
employees have less than a thirty (30) minute duty-free, uninterrupted lunch period unless the
students have a regular lunch period of less than thirty (30) minutes, in which case the duty-free
period shall be the same as the regular lunch period.

7.5 Teaching Schedules
    A. Secondary teachers shall not be required to teach continuously for more than three (3)
       periods, nor three (3) hours where double periods are used. Elementary teachers shall not
       be required to teach continuously for more than three (3) hours.
    B. Every effort shall be made to see that no secondary teacher is required to teach more than
       two (2) different subjects or grade levels.

7.6 Class Size

Pupil-teacher ratios/class size shall be established by BCPSS each year based upon financial and
student needs. Class size as reported in the budget shall be posted.

7.7 Class Coverage

Teachers, including but not limited to classroom teachers, special area teachers, and clinicians,
shall not be required to take another teacher’s classes except in an emergency. Examples of an
emergency are the following: a sudden illness of a teacher during the school day, or awaiting the
arrival of an obtained substitute, and other situations mutually accepted by the teacher and the
principal.

7.8 Available Preparation Time
    A. The Board will provide three (3) forty-five (45) minute preparation periods per week for
       all elementary school teachers.
    B. When children are under the supervision of the physical education teacher, librarian, music
       resource teacher, or art resource teacher, the classroom teacher, at his option, may leave
       the teaching area and use that period as a preparation period. The teacher shall not be
       assigned any other duty at that period.
    C. The Board will maintain a list of substitute teachers who will be used for resource teachers’
       absences. This list should be available to each principal.
    D. Each school having a rescheduled day shall allow thirty (30) minutes of that time for
       teacher preparation and planning.
    E. Collaborative Planning



                                                29
               1. For secondary schools that have scheduled more than the five (5) preparation
                  periods per week set forth in Article 7.2, principals may use one (1) of the
                  additional preparation periods for collaborative planning.
               2. For secondary schools that have not scheduled more than the five (5)
                  preparation periods per week set forth in Article 7.2, principals may use one (1)
                  of the five (5) preparation periods for collaborative planning.
               3. For elementary schools that have scheduled more than the three (3) preparation
                  periods per week set forth in Article 7.8A, principals may use one (1) of the
                  additional preparation periods for collaborative planning.
               4. If BCPSS desires to have a collaborative planning period in an elementary
                  school, it shall add a fourth preparation period which may be used for that
                  purpose.
               5. If the number of a teacher’s weekly preparation periods is reduced due to an
                  unforeseen circumstance, that teacher’s preparation time will not be further
                  reduced for collaborative planning.

7.9 Non-Teaching Duties
The Board acknowledges that a teacher’s primary responsibility is to teach and that his energies
should be utilized to this end. Therefore, the Board agrees that teachers shall not be required to
perform the following:
    School cafeteria duty
    Before-and after-school playground duty
    Lunchtime playground duty
    Collection of money for insurance, savings stamps, charities, and PTA dues
    Accessioning library books
    School-wide detention duty
    Lavatory duty
    Office duty
    The duplication of school-wide or departmental teaching materials.

To eliminate problems within the school related to safety and/or discipline, the teachers and the
principals will meet to develop a plan.

7.10 Transportation
Teachers will not be required to drive pupils to activities which take place away from the school
building. Teachers may do so voluntarily, however, with the advance approval of their principal
or immediate supervisor.

7.11 Substitutes
     A. No teacher shall be required to obtain the services of a substitute in the event of his
        absence. In the case of a scheduled absence, however, the teacher may assist in securing
        a substitute.
     B. Members of the bargaining unit, unable to report to work, will be able to call the pertinent
        information to a particular telephone number established for this purpose.
     C. Except where there is a budget control freeze or where funds are not available for
        permanent filling of a position, a long-term substitute position shall not be used as a
        replacement for any recall procedure.
     D. Provided funds are available, substitutes shall be provided for resource teachers in the
        event of illness for a full school day.

                                                30
7.12 Split Classes
Every effort will be made to minimize the use of split classes in elementary schools. This is not
intended to preclude experimental, innovative or specialized classes. A “split class” for the
purpose of this section is a mixture of elementary pupils from different defined grade levels
assigned to one teacher or one room for a continuous and extended period of time.

7.13 Classroom Interruptions
Classroom interruptions shall be kept to a minimum. Principals shall establish schedules for the
use of the intercom services in each school, including staff use. The schedule shall be posted.
Deviations from the schedule shall be made only in an emergency or when other means of
communication are not possible or feasible.

7.14 Determination of Grades
A. The teacher shall maintain the right and responsibility to determine grades within the grading
    policy of the Baltimore City Public School System based upon his professional judgment of
    available criteria pertinent to any given subject area or activity for which he is responsible.
B. Once a teacher has provided evidence documenting a grade, no undue pressure should be
    applied to the teacher by the principal in an effort to force the teacher to change that grade.
C. If a principal of a school feels it is necessary to change a pupil’s grade in any subject at the end
    of the grading period, the principal shall consult with the teacher who issued the original grade
    and give his reasons in writing for the necessary change to the teacher. If a change in grade is
    made, it shall be recorded and logged (on a log kept by the Instructional Leadership Executive
    Director) as the principal’s grade and not the teacher’s grade.

7.15 Meetings
A. The principal and/or other administrator and the Union Chapter Committee in each school shall
    meet at least once a month during the school year, or additionally if mutually agreed, to discuss
    areas of concern. No decisions reached in these meetings will modify or alter the terms of this
    agreement. No more than five (5) members of the Union Chapter Committee shall attend these
    meetings.
B. Teachers shall be required to attend one (1) faculty meeting per month for no more than one
    (1) hour in length. The notice for faculty meetings shall be given to the teachers involved at
    least three (3) days prior to the meeting. Teachers shall have the opportunity to suggest items
    for the agenda if such desire is expressed to the principal at least two (2) days prior to the
    meeting. The agenda shall be posted one (1) day prior to the meeting.
C. For the purpose of familiarizing teachers new to the system with the bargaining representative
    and collective bargaining Agreement, the Union shall be provided with reasonable time on the
    agenda to address such employees at an orientation meeting or training program scheduled by
    the Board. The Board shall notify the Union at least five (5) days prior to the scheduled
    meeting. The Union shall communicate a confirmation of its intent to appear at the meeting
    within twenty-four (24) hours of the Board’s notice.
D. The Union recognizes the need for increased participation by parents in the education process
    of their children. If parent/teacher organization meetings are scheduled, teachers shall be
    required to attend three (3) meetings a year. Teachers shall have input as to the agenda and
    time of the meeting.

7.16 Lesson Plans

A. Teachers responsible for the instruction of students shall prepare lesson plans as an essential
   part of their teaching responsibilities. The format and organization of lesson plans are best
                                                  31
   determined by the individual teacher. Every lesson plan should include an indication of the
   objectives, content materials and procedure for reference. The principal or supervising
   administrator may suggest a particular format or organization. However, where the principal
   has personally substantiated need for specific organization of lessons- plans, the teacher may
   then be required to utilize a suggested form in the preparation of lesson plans. The request for
   daily lesson plans should not be used as a disciplinary measure.
B. Any request to review a teacher’s plan book shall be made directly to the teacher. If problems
   exist the result of the review will be discussed with the teacher in a personal conference.
C. Probationary teachers may be required to follow a particular form of lesson plan for the first
   two years.
D. Students with disabilities may be instructed by special education and/or general education
   teachers. BCPSS shall identify these students, and it shall deliver a current Individualized
   Educational Plan (“IEP”) to the teachers to whom the students are assigned. A teacher’s lesson
   plans must reflect the last IEP for the student that is delivered to the teacher. This requirement
   may be satisfied by placement of a copy of the last IEP with the Lesson Plan Book.
E. BTU and BCPSS shall monitor application of Sec. 7.16.D.1. of this Agreement through the
   Joint Committee that is organized under Sec. 18.12.A.

7.17 Rescheduled Day
The rescheduled day is an effort to provide staff with continuous and uninterrupted time during
the school day for staff development activities, workshops, and seminars which cannot be
scheduled because of time constraints within the regular work week. Decisions regarding
rescheduled day activities shall be made jointly by the school administrator and the faculty.


7.18 State Mandated Assessments
BCPSS shall make available in the schools in which the teachers are expected to administer the
State Mandated Assessments copies of all current reference books and manuals that are prepared
for teachers by MSDE about the State Mandated Assessments. BCPSS shall notify teachers in the
schools about conferences or training programs organized by MSDE about the State Mandated
Assessments in which teachers may participate.

7.19 School Based Options

The Board and the BTU have jointly agreed to the following terms regarding school based options
“SBO”:

A.
     •   The CEO and the BTU President shall monitor SBO waivers and implementation.
     •   The Joint Governing Panel shall assist the SBO waiver process and implementation.
     •   An independent audit and electronic online survey will be conducted yearly with input by
         the BTU on content of survey, scope of the audit and the final report.
     •   All schools are available for full implementation of SBO subject to CEO and BTU
         President monitoring of SBO waivers and implementation.

B.       Safeguards & Protections

     1. SBO limitations
        • SBOs shall be limited to selected parts of Article VII – specifically sections 7.1, 7.2,
          7.3., and 7.8.
                                                 32
   2. Implementation of SBO
      • Any additional hours or school days worked as a result of SBO votes shall be paid pro-
         rata at the contract rate.
      • 80% vote of teachers is required by secret ballot vote.
      • All proposals for contract waivers must be submitted to the CEO and the Union
         President fourteen (14) days prior to a vote on the waiver.
      • Vetoes (Vetoes can be implemented before submission of SBO to teachers for vote)
         by the:
             o Building rep
             o BTU president
             o CEO
      • Unless renewed all SBO’s shall sunset at the end of the school year.
      • There shall be no more than one waiver of any contract provision per vote.
      • There shall be no retaliation or arbitrary or capricious action by principals against any
         teacher, including, but not limited to, negative evaluations or transfer out of school for
         any position taken on an SBO issue.
      • The Board will comply with Article 6.2.B.
C.    Charter Schools

       If a charter school’s authorization includes an extended school day, the procedures of
       Section 7.19.B shall not apply; however compensation for the extended school day shall be
       negotiated pursuant to Section 7.3.E. If a charter school’s authorization does not include an
       extended school day, but the charter school seeks to add an extended school day to its
       program, the procedures of Sections 7.19.B and 7.3.E shall apply.

7.20 Workload

The parties agree to form a committee with equal representation from the Union and the Board to
consider teacher workload and the impact on student learning and shall report the outcome to the
CEO.

7.21 Individualized Lactation Plans

In furtherance of Board Policy ACH and Administrative Regulation ACH-RA, a school-based
administrator shall meet with a bargaining unit member who is lactating to establish an
individualized lactation plan in connection with a Lactation Time Request submitted to the Office
of Equal Opportunity and Title IX Compliance. The plan should, where possible, include access to
a sanitary private locking space for the purpose of expressing breast milk and, when necessary,
consideration of coverage during authorized lactation breaks.

ARTICLE VIII

Teacher Facilities, Materials, Supplies and Equipment

8.1 Furniture
Newly ordered desks will be capable of being locked. The Board will provide each teacher a
serviceable desk, chair, and access to a telephone for school business purposes. A telephone will
be made available for teachers to use for school business. Teachers and principals shall arrange

                                                33
this use to provide reasonable privacy during the call. During the work day, teachers may make
personal phone calls only if the calls cannot be made at any other time.

8.2 Restrooms
The Board will provide, within physical constraints of existing buildings, accessible, well-lighted,
clean restrooms with adequate sanitary facilities including toilet paper for exclusive use of
teachers.

8.3 Dining Facilities
The Board will provide, within physical constraints of existing buildings, a separate dining area
for the use of teachers.

8.4 Supplies and Equipment
A. Principals and/or administrators in charge shall advise the faculty of the amount of funds
    available to the school for the purchase of supplies and materials. On or before a specific date
    to be established in each school, each teacher may submit in writing to the principal a suggested
    list of supplies and books for his/her pupils. Upon request, a teacher may review the actual
    order placed for textbooks and supplies.
B. Textbooks in the schools which are ready for distribution will be made available for use during
    the first full week of the school year to teachers who have need of them.
C. If supplies are in the school, they shall be made available to teachers as needed.
D. The Board shall provide to each member of the bargaining unit, if requested, a laptop computer
    that allows them to perform their job duties, and is capable of connecting to high-speed
    internet access, within fourteen (14) days of the request (absent supply issues beyond the
    Board’s control). Bargaining unit members shall not be required to use their own personal
    computers to do their work.

   lf the Board fails to provide bargaining unit members with laptop computers, who have
   requested one, the Board shall not, solely and directly as a result of not providing bargaining
   unit members with a laptop computer, discipline them for failure to perform their work, they
   shall suffer no ill effect on their annual evaluation, and the Board shall not, except in case of an
   emergency, assign their work to co-workers who possess the necessary equipment.

8.5 Instructional Materials

A. The Board recognizes that appropriate texts, library reference facilities, maps and globes,
   laboratory equipment, audio-visual equipment, art supplies, athletic equipment, current
   periodicals, standard tests and questionnaires, computers, and similar materials are the tools of
   the teaching profession.
B. Efforts shall be continued to seek and use instructional materials which reflect the contribution
   and presence of diverse ethnic and cultural groups.
C. 1. Selection of instructional materials for each school shall be made by a committee of teachers
   chosen by the faculty within that school.
   2. On a City-wide basis, a central committee for each discipline shall be established jointly by
   the Union and BCPSS for book selection on all levels in which at least half of the committee
   shall include teachers from each Area of which no fewer than two (2) of the total number of
   teachers on the committee shall be appointed by the Union.
   3. For each school year, the committee referred to in Sec. 8.5.C.2 shall be composed of as
   many Union appointed teachers as specified above as long as the committee retains at least
   some teachers that had prior experience on such committee.
                                                 34
D. The Board shall provide a teacher reference library in each school and include therein teacher
   reference materials which are reasonably requested of the school and which are within the
   allocated budget of the school.
E. Small but selective libraries shall be established for each secondary classroom. The Board
   shall allocate some library funds for the purchase of books and periodicals chosen by the
   classroom teacher for teaching purposes.
F. Funds allotted to the shop and vocational programs shall be used exclusively for those
   designated purposes.
G. The Board shall provide all teachers assigned to laboratory and shop classes with protective
   clothing and safety equipment, required by local, state and federal law.

8.6 Access to Copy Machines and Copy Paper

A. Each school shall be provided with a sufficient number of copy machines and a sufficient
    amount of copy paper, toner cartridges, and staple cartridges to allow bargaining unit members
    to perform their job duties.
B. In the event that a copy machine breaks down or the school has no available toner, all bargaining
    unit members at that school shall receive a communication as soon as is reasonably possible
    notifying them that the copier machine is not functioning.

8.7 Classrooms
The Board shall be responsible for maintaining a standard of cleanliness in each teacher’s
classroom.

8.8 Sanitary and Health Related Supplies
The Board shall supply appropriate sanitary and health related materials such as rubber gloves,
bleach and disinfectant as required by the Health Department or other local, state or national
agencies to meet the universal health standards.

8.9 Infectious Diseases
BCPSS shall adhere to OSHA and MOSH standards, and to all accepted public health protocols,
to assure adequate work place protection for personnel potentially exposed to infectious diseases
such as, but not limited to, tuberculosis, hepatitis, whooping cough (pertussis), meningitis,
ringworm, conjunctivitis, and HIV/AIDS.

8.10Emergency Closing of Schools
In the event that a school must be closed due to emergencies resulting from unforeseen problems
with the physical plant, BCPSS shall make reasonable effort to notify teachers of their alternate
assignments before reporting time.

In the event that all schools are closed due to a weather or other emergency, employees assigned
to School Headquarters at North Avenue may take liberal leave if School Headquarters is open.

8.11 Mold in BCPSS Buildings
BCPSS shall adhere to OSHA guidelines on mold. If any mold growth is found, it shall be
promptly remediated pursuant to OSHA guidelines.

ARTICLE IX
Evaluation

9.1 Evaluation
                                                35
A. A copy of the Board’s revised Performance-Based Evaluation System (“PBES”) approved on
   September 23, 2003, and any subsequently revised PBES shall be distributed by the employer
   to each teacher at the beginning of each new school year.
B. The Board and the Union agree that because it is official Board policy, the success of the
   current PBES and any subsequently revised PBES shall require all BCPSS staff and
   administrators to faithfully undertake the roles and responsibilities that are described in the
   document, and all staff and administrators also must carefully follow each of the steps
   contained therein.
C. Tenured and non-tenured teachers shall be notified of a year-end unsatisfactory performance
   evaluation on or before May 1. No unsatisfactory performance evaluations may be issued after
   that date.
D. The principal will make every effort to perform at least one classroom observation in the case
   of an unsatisfactory evaluation.

E. The process for evaluations shall remain the same: teachers shall continue to be evaluated by
   school-based personnel; clinicians and others shall continue to be evaluated by specialists in
   their fields. In accordance with State guidelines, BTU and the Board shall negotiate that portion
   of the evaluation tool that is not determined at the State level.

F. Principal Training
    1. The Board shall require contract training with all principals (collaborative with BTU and
    the Office of Human Capital).
    2. The CEO or designee and the BTU President or designee shall organize required training
    for all principals on professional development for effective, fair, objective, and consistent
    teacher evaluations.

9.2 Certification
A. Certified employees shall be obligated to give the same notice to the Board as is required by
    COMAR Sec. 13A.12.05.03. (Suspension and Revocations – Reporting Procedures).
B. The Board shall accept documentation for the renewal of a certificate within one hundred (100)
    days of the date listed under “Period of Validity” on the certificate. If a teacher submits the
    necessary documentation for renewal of a certificate before the expiration of the certificate, the
    Board shall not offer the teacher a conditional certificate. The Board shall submit to the
    Maryland State Department of Education documentation received from teachers for renewal of
    a certificate within 90 days of the expiration of the certificate.
C. The Office of Human Capital shall respond in writing to bargaining unit members’ certification
    inquiries within ten (10) weekdays. The Office of Human Capital will include in such response
    (if relevant to the inquiry and linked to a course evaluation) whether or not a particular course
    meets certification requirements.

D. In the event an application for certification or certification renewal is rejected, the specific
   reason for rejection will be provided to the bargaining unit member.

E. Upon being hired, the Board shall provide bargaining unit members who do not have initial
   professional certification with a list of Maryland approved programs as available options to
   fulfill the requirements for their professional certification.

F. Within ninety (90) days of the date of execution of the Agreement, the Board shall provide
   existing bargaining unit members who have never held professional certification and have not
                                                 36
   previously received a transcript analysis and a Maryland course evaluation with a Maryland
   course evaluation and a transcript analysis if the employee has provided all documents needed
   to do so.

9.3 Notice of Appeal
When BCPSS issues an unsatisfactory evaluation to a teacher, and when either the CEO or BCPSS
issues a notice to a teacher of re-certification to a second class certificate, BCPSS shall include in
that correspondence to the teacher a notice that advises the teacher of possible grievance and appeal
rights under State law, the Board’s policies, COMAR and the Negotiated Labor Agreement.

ARTICLE X

Transfers

10.1 Voluntary Transfers
There shall be a voluntary transfer process each year. It shall contain a period (window of mutual
consent) of at least sixty (60) days which shall not end prior to May 1 and during which principals
and worksite managers with vacancies and transfer-eligible employees seeking a transfer can
mutually agree to a transfer for the upcoming school year. The Board will communicate through
various tools, including the BTU website, the dates of the window of mutual consent. All
bargaining unit members who have received a rating other than the lowest possible rating on their
most recent performance evaluation shall be eligible for a voluntary transfer. Qualifying employees
interested in a voluntary transfer will use the electronic process identified by the Human Capital
Office to indicate that they are interested in transferring. The Board will provide all principals and
worksite managers access to an electronic list of all employees interested in transferring.
Employees will have access to a list of all schools and worksites with vacant positions for the
upcoming school year. Applications for voluntary transfers shall be accepted by the Human Capital
Office for a period beginning with the opening of the window of mutual consent and extending for
no less than 70% of the duration of the full window.

The Human Capital Office shall host at least one talent fair during the window of mutual consent
to facilitate mutual consent between principals/worksite managers and transfer- eligible employees.

No voluntary transfer shall be denied because the employee’s current position is locked in the
school or worksite budget. Employees are eligible for voluntary transfer whether they are in
positions for which the Hiring Manager is a Principal (i.e., unlocked positions) or positions for
which the Hiring Manager is a District Office staff member (i.e., locked positions, including Pre-K
program staff, certain Special Education program staff, ESOL program staff, and related service
providers).

No voluntary transfer shall be denied for reasons that are arbitrary, capricious, unreasonable or
based on personal preference.

Subject to the provisions of Article VI, Section 6.3 (Reductions in Force), the Human Capital Office
will identify a funded position for all surplus employees who are not placed using the voluntary
transfer process. Such placement is contingent upon the employee having at least a developing
evaluation rating for the current school year.

10.2 Involuntary Transfers

                                                 37
Involuntary transfers shall be made in such a way as to prevent undue disruptions of the
instructional programs. Such transfers may result from a Principal’s recommendation, as
appropriate, and then to the Chief Human Capital Officer, a directive of other governmental
agencies, compliance with staffing requirements defined by the Board of School Commissioners,
or judicially imposed.

When an involuntary transfer results from directives of other governmental agencies, it shall be
made on the basis of the system-wide seniority of the teachers within the affected school. Teachers
shall be notified of a transfer at least ten (10) school days prior to the effective date of the transfer,
unless by law, the special education teacher is required to be transferred in less than ten (10) school
days. A teacher may request a meeting with the persons responsible for the transfer. This meeting
(the three (3) day meeting), if requested, shall take place within three (3) school days of the transfer
notice. The teacher shall be provided with the reasons for the transfer at this meeting. If unsatisfied
with this meeting, the Union may request an additional meeting with the appropriate administrator
to further discuss the reasons for the transfer. Reasons shall not be arbitrary, capricious or
unreasonable. The Board and Administration will make every effort to minimize the number of
involuntary transfers. Both parties will strive to accomplish all meeting requirements within the
same ten (10) day period. If a three-day meeting is requested, the transfer shall not be carried out
until after the three-day meeting and subsequent appeal meeting with the Instructional Leader
Executive Director, the Executive Director of Secondary Schools, or appropriate BCPSS
administrator have taken place.

Bargaining unit members involuntarily transferred or placed in a surplus status shall be personally
notified prior to notification to any bargaining unit member and any non-supervisory staff whose
roles do not permit knowledge of such transfer or surplus status.


ARTICLE XI

Promotions

11.1 Promotions

A. It is the policy of the Board to select the best qualified applicant for a promotion.
B. The Board and the Union acknowledge that a promotional policy has been adopted. If any
   changes are proposed for this policy, the Union will have full participation and involvement in
   any discussions.
C. A promotion is the movement of an employee to a higher level of responsibility, authority, or
   range of duties resulting in a higher annual salary.
D. Notice of all promotional and professional opportunities during the school year shall be posted
   in all schools and/or the BCPSS website. Notice shall be posted in all schools and/or the
   BCPSS website at least fifteen (15) work days prior to the closing date for applications. In the
   event such opportunities arise outside the school year, the Board shall notify the Union twenty
   (20) calendar days prior to the closing date for the application.
E. The posting shall include a description of the duties, the required qualifications, location, salary
   range, deadline for submission of application, and any other pertinent information.


ARTICLE XII

Academic Freedom
                                                   38
12.1 Academic Freedom

The Board will continue to recognize that the personal life of a teacher is not an appropriate
concern and shall not warrant the attention of the Board except as it may directly prevent the
teacher from performing properly his assigned functions during the work day. Teachers will be
assured freedom of individual expression and protection from censorship or restraint which might
interfere with their obligation to present fairly all sides of issues in their teaching functions.

ARTICLE XIII

Teacher Protection

13.1 Teacher Protection
A. If a teacher, in connection with his employment, is subjected to assault or battery, he shall
    immediately report the incident and the circumstances to his Principal. The Principal shall
    forward the report to the Executive Director of Elementary/Middle or Secondary Schools, as
    appropriate, with a copy to the Union.
B. A student involved in an assault on a teacher may be removed from the school by the Principal
    or other appropriate administrator in accordance with Board rules and State law.
C. The alleged assault will be promptly investigated. The report of this investigation shall be
    forwarded to the Board and to the Union . The teacher has the right to have a conference with
    the appropriate Executive Director prior to a decision relating to the student’s placement in the
    school. If there is an objection to the placement decision, the teacher has the right to request a
    fair hearing.
D. If the assault is by a pupil or a non-pupil and the teacher wishes to file criminal charges, the
    Principal or their appropriate staff will promptly report the incident to the proper law
    enforcement authorities.
E. In either case (pupil or non-pupil), the Board agrees to cooperate with the teacher by complying
    with any lawful request by the teacher for information in the Board’s possession relating to the
    incident or the person involved.
F. In cases involving an assault upon a teacher, the security officer shall, upon request of the
    teacher involved, provide the necessary advice and assistance including assistance in securing
    proper warrants, investigation of assaults, filing of juvenile petitions, calling for Police
    Department assistance, accompanying the teacher to court and sharing information relevant to
    the assault incident.
G. If a teacher files criminal charges against a student, the student shall not return to the teacher’s
    class until after final determination of criminal charges. In any event, the Board shall attempt
    to place the student in another school pending final determination. In all cases the actions
    described herein are subject to the order and direction of appropriate judicial authority.
H. A joint committee of three (3) Union representatives and three (3) Board representatives shall
    be established to study and propose responses to the issues of teachers’ personal property
    destroyed, stolen or damaged by students or others on school property, as a result of accident,
    vandalism or theft. The committee shall issue findings and recommendations to be presented
    to the CEO for his/her consideration.

13.2 Liability Insurance
The Board shall provide comprehensive liability insurance to any teacher in accordance with State
law. Such insurance shall provide, within the limits of the coverage, indemnification against
damages sustained by him by reason of an action or claim against him arising out of his
employment.
                                                  39
13.3 Legal Counsel
If criminal or civil proceedings are brought against any teacher as a result of any action or inaction
on the part of the teacher during the course of his employment, the Board shall furnish in
accordance with State law legal counsel to defend him in such proceedings upon his request.

13.4 School Visitors
The present policy for visitors in the school building shall continue in effect. This policy provides
for visitor registration, proof of identification and statement of business, under penalty of law (cf.
Baltimore City Code Article 18, Section 1-38). Teachers shall be notified prior to visitors being
sent to the classroom. Efforts will be made to escort visitors when appropriate.

13.5 Safe Schools and Secure Schools
The Board shall maintain safe and secure schools. The Board shall continue to institute safety
procedures including visitor passes, school police officers, when appropriate, student identification
badges in senior high schools and any other preventive measures including adequate and
operational public address systems in every school.

There is a strong connection between discipline and academic success. When a student becomes
a disciplinary problem through actions or non-attendance, the student risks falling behind in the
learning process. Students who experience continuing behavior problems may be recommended
for an alternate education program suited to the student’s specific needs and in compliance with
federal and state special education mandates.

BCPSS shall continue to monitor schools in an effort to improve safety and security in the schools,
and to take such action as may be appropriate such as its recent allocation of funds for school
security.

13.6 HIV Policy
The Board will follow the policy guidelines for management of children with AIDS and/or HIV
and HIV-related illnesses. The Union shall be notified prior to any changes in these guidelines.

13.7 Employee Assistance

A. The Board shall institute an EAP program which provides for mental health counseling,
   treatment for alcohol and drug abuse and treatment for stress-related illness. These services
   shall be available on a voluntary basis and without cost to the employee although, if voluntary,
   they may be funded in part by the employee’s health insurance benefits under 5.2 of this
   Agreement.
B. All employees using the EAP shall be assured confidentiality. Without prior consent from the
   employee, an employee’s medical records from the EAP cannot be used to justify or document
   discipline or removal from service. There may be Medical Review Officer (MRO) review of
   fitness for duty, and the MRO may report the MRO’s overall conclusions.

13.8 Diversion Program
The Board shall continue to sponsor the Diversion Program that it administers in conjunction with
the Office of the State’s Attorney for Baltimore City. Consistent with the memorandum entitled
Introduction/Purpose Diversion Counseling Program dated April 23, 1999, the Diversion Program
shall provide group counseling for bargaining unit members who either are in the process of being
charged or who are charged with an offense committed during the course of their employment
                                                 40
against a minor who is a public school student. The counselor who leads the meetings shall be
selected, jointly, by the Office of the State’s Attorney for Baltimore City, the Board and the Union.
In necessitous circumstances, BCPSS, with the participation of the State’s Attorney and the Union,
may alter the program.

Section 13.9 Right to Representation

When a teacher is notified to appear for a meeting or an investigatory interview which may lead to
discipline, including, but not limited to, reprimand, suspension, or dismissal, the teacher shall be
advised of their right to representation prior to the beginning of any such meeting or interview and
shall be given a reasonable time to arrange for representation.

Section 13.10 Negative Comments

No bargaining unit member shall be subjected to negative or disparaging comments from any
administrator or supervisor in the presence of students, families, other nonsupervisory employees,
or at public gatherings. This is not intended to prohibit school system officials from responding to
the media or addressing school communities in a manner consistent with applicable law. Similarly,
this is not intended to prohibit an administrator or supervisor from engaging in full and frank
discussions with employees. All interactions by all participants shall adhere to normal standards of
civility and mutual respect.

ARTICLE XIV

Professional Development

14.1 Tuition Reimbursement

A. The Board shall pay a portion of the cost of tuition fees for courses taken by teachers up to and
   including twelve (12) credit hours per school year in an educational field or related area
   approved by the Board. Tuition reimbursement payments by the Board shall be taxed only as
   required by IRS rules and regulations. Reimbursement will be in accordance with the
   following percentages:
   1. Up to and including Master’s Degree – 75% tuition reimbursement
   2. Beyond Master’s Degree - 50% tuition reimbursement
B. Teachers with less than five (5) years of continuous service receiving tuition reimbursement
   shall be required to remain an employee of the Board for two (2) school years following the
   reimbursement. Teachers with more than five (5) years of continuous service shall be required
   to remain an employee of the Board for the entire year following the reimbursement. In that
   regard, the teacher shall be required to sign a reimbursement agreement. Teachers with less
   than five (5) years of continuous service who voluntarily terminate employment shall return
   75% of all tuition reimbursement monies to the Board for the previous two (2) school years.
   Teachers with more than five (5) years of continuous service who voluntarily terminate
   employment shall return 100% of all tuition reimbursement monies to the Board for the
   previous semester. Teachers who retire from the BCPSS are not required to reimburse the
   Board.
C. Teachers who minimally hold a standard professional certificate and who obtain a post
   graduate degree in a critical shortage area as identified by BCPSS (e.g. math, science or special
   education) will receive a $1,500 payment not to be added to the base rate. Such payment shall
   be paid at $500 per school year, in June, over a three (3) year period. Only full time classroom
                                                 41
   teachers are eligible and payment shall be contingent upon the teacher receiving a satisfactory
   evaluation each year.
D. The grade requirement for tuition reimbursement shall be “B” or better.
E. Applications for course approval and proof of passing shall be hand delivered (receipt
   provided) or made by certified mail to the Office of Human Capital, Attention: Tuition
   Reimbursement, 200 E. North Avenue, Baltimore, Maryland 21202, or uploaded
   electronically
F. The deadlines for submitting applications for approval of tuition reimbursement shall be as
   follows:
        1. October 1 – Fall semester
        2. February 1 – Spring semester
        3. July 1 – Summer semester
   Note: A tuition payment statement or bill with a canceled check must accompany the
   completed application. Should any deadline fall on a weekend or holiday, applications shall
   be due the following workday.
G. The Board shall notify all applicants of course approval within fourteen (14) calendar days of
   application.
H. If all appropriate information and documentation that a course has been passed is completed
   and submitted by the specified deadline in Article XIV, Section E & F, payment for tuition
   reimbursement shall be made within forty (40) school days.

14.2 Professional Development

A. The Board and the Union mutually recognize the importance of professional development, and
   that it must be designed and delivered to teachers at all levels. To that end, the parties agree
   to work together to provide professional development for teachers that is focused on content
   and pedagogy, is research-based, work related, continuous and consistent with the goals and
   objectives of the Master Plan of BCPSS. Professional development must be designed and
   delivered to assure/promote:

       1. Individual and school improvement;
       2. Improved student achievement;
       3. Implementation of strategic plans;
       4. Compliance with MSDE mandates; and
       5. Achieving goals and objectives of the Board’s Master Plan.

B. Important to the success of professional development and the performance based evaluation
   system is the commitment of each teacher to meet or exceed the requirements and criteria set
   forth by the Board. It is understood that all teachers are mandated to participate in the ten (10)
   days of scheduled professional development activities as designated in the approved school
   calendar. Clearly, the commitment of each teacher to meet or exceed the Board’s criteria is
   essential to the success of the professional development program and to the performance based
   evaluation system.
C. A Joint Committee of no more than three (3) employees designated by the Board and three (3)
   Union representatives shall be formed to make educationally appropriate decisions regarding
   teacher professional development. The first meeting of the Joint Committee shall be convened
   by August 15th.

         1.    The Joint Committee will work cooperatively to develop a system-wide menu of
               recommended professional development opportunities.
                                                 42
         2.    Outcomes/programs recommended by the Joint Committee shall be made in writing
               to the Chief Academic Officer (CAO) by September 15th.
         3.    The CAO shall have the final authority to approve items submitted by the joint
               Committee. If the Joint Committee’s recommendation(s) are modified or rejected,
               the CAO shall provide the reason(s) in writing to the Joint Committee within ten
               (10) days.

14.3 Individual Development Plans (IDP)

A. Each year every teacher shall submit a plan for individual professional development to his/her
   Principal as part of the Performance Based Evaluation System. The approved IDP is intended
   to provide teachers with an opportunity to design their own professional growth plans based
   on their individual needs and personal goals, except as noted in 14.3 B. The IDP shall be
   updated annually and must demonstrate improved levels of skill and knowledge in subject
   content and classroom practice.

B. If a teacher’s observation(s) include specific recommendations designed to address an
   identified area(s) of needed improvement in the teacher’s performance, the IDP must address
   the identified area(s) of need through the performance improvement process.
   Recommendations must be directly related to the teacher’s classroom performance.

C. Teachers may choose professional development opportunities offered through the Board, the
   BTU Teacher Center or through other programs designed to address performance
   improvement.

ARTICLE XV

Leaves of Absence

15.1 Communicable Disease
A. An employee who is absent because of contact with a communicable disease which requires
    isolation under the City Health Code, but who does not have the disease himself, shall be paid
    full salary for such time as the Health Commissioner of Baltimore City declares the staff
    member subject to isolation.
B. When an employee has contracted a communicable disease as defined above including
    Tuberculosis, Chicken Pox, Hepatitis and Measles and there exists a number of cases of that
    disease among those students with whom the employee has had direct contact, as determined
    by the School System’s Medical Officer, that employee shall suffer no loss of pay or
    accumulated sick leave for any days that the employee is absent from school. Prior to approval
    of this leave with pay, medical verification of the employee’s illness shall be required.
C. Tests required by the Board to vaccinate or diagnose such diseases shall be paid for by the
    Board.

15.2 Sick Leave

A. Each employee shall be granted sick leave with pay during leaves of absence because of
   personal illness. Teachers shall at the beginning of each school year be credited with fifteen
   (15) work days of sick leave. Any unused sick leave shall be carried forward from year to year
   and accumulated up to a maximum of 315 days.


                                               43
B. Teachers shall, at their request, be allowed to use sick leave for absence due to disability
   connected with or resulting from childbirth. The Board and the Union recognize that there is
   a presumption that this disability will occur in most cases for a period of four (4) weeks before
   and six (6) weeks after delivery. Upon termination of such disability, the teacher must return
   to work unless she resigns or requests a leave of absence.
C. A full time teacher shall have four (4) weeks for adoption beginning with the day the child is
   received. The absence shall be charged to accumulated sick leave. In the event that both
   parents are Board employees, they may divide the use of paid adoption leave between
   themselves or either one may use the full four (4) weeks. In order to receive this leave, an
   employee must complete a Request for Leave Form and attach documentation from the
   adoption agency.
D. Up to five (5) days of accumulated sick leave may be used by the teacher in the case of illness
   in the teacher’s immediate family as defined in Board rules.
E. Whenever medical verification is required as a result of the present Board policy, said
   verification shall only state that the employee was absent for medical reasons and is now
   capable of returning to work.
F. Sick Leave for new teachers shall be at the rate of 10 days per year for the first three years.
   When the new teacher receives their election to tenure they will receive 5 days for each of the
   three years (a total of 15 days) added to their sick leave total. Teachers transferring from
   another Maryland public school system in which they were tenured and had received a
   satisfactory or above rating on their most recent evaluation shall receive ten (10) days of sick
   leave for each probationary year of employment with BCPSS; when such teacher receives
   tenure in BCPSS, five (5) days will be added to their sick leave for each year of their
   probationary employment with BCPSS.

15.3 Sick Leave Conversion

A. Annual
1. The sick leave year for conversion purposes begins on the day immediately following the last
   payroll period in November and extends through the last payroll period in November of the
   following year.
2. For conversion purposes, a teacher’s annual sick leave allotment will be treated as if the total



                                         -
   number of sick leave days given for the year were divided by the total months of employment
   during a year and subsequently credited monthly. The posting of the full allotment of sick
   leave days on September 1st has no effect on this process.
3. For every four days of sick leave accumulated during the sick leave year, an employee may
   convert one (1) day to cash, at his rate of pay at the time of conversion, and retain the remaining
   three (3) days in his sick leave account. A maximum of three (3) days of sick leave may be
   converted to cash. An employee’s days of personal business leave which, unused, have been
   accumulated as sick leave is not subject to annual sick leave conversion.
4. An employee may convert to cash either all or none of the days to which he is entitled.
   Conversion of only some of the days to which an employee is entitled is not allowed.
5. Payment for sick leave conversion will not be included in the employee’s regular salary check,
   but will be made by a separate check. These checks will be issued no later than December 24
   each year, and will include the usual deduction for taxes and Social Security.

B. Upon Termination
In addition to the above sick leave conversion, employees who are pensioned or who elect to
terminate their BCPSS service without pension and have completed at least twenty (20) years of
service, regardless of age, shall be entitled to convert one (1) day’s pay for each four (4) days of
                                                 44
unused accumulated sick leave at the time of their retirement and/or termination from BCPSS
service.

15.4 Sick Leave Bank
A. The Sick Leave Bank will continue in effect.
B. Effective July 1, 1980, membership in the bank was voluntary for all employees. Thereafter,
    all new employees who request membership will be assessed one day of sick leave for deposit
    in the bank.
C. A member of the bargaining unit may participate in the bank only after:
    1. Filing application with the Sick Leave Bank Committee;
    2. Submitting satisfactory medical evidence of the illness;
    3. Submitting evidence of having exhausted all accumulated leave;
    4. Satisfying such other criteria as may be established by the joint committee which includes
         an evaluation of the teacher’s past sick leave usage record.
D. A joint committee of six (6) members, half named by the Board and half named by the Union,
    will administer the Sick Leave Bank and establish specific procedures for its utilization.
E. Any employee who contributed one day to the Sick Leave Bank shall not be charged a sick
    leave day for the purpose of sick leave conversion. The day will be drawn from the prior year’s
    accumulated sick leave, except in the event that the employee has no sick leave, in which case
    that day will be drawn from the current year.
F. New employees must join the Sick Leave Bank within the first thirty (30) days of their
    employment or lose their right to do so.
G. Employees may relinquish their membership in the sick leave bank at any time; if they do so,
    however, they will lose both their contribution in the Sick Leave Bank and their right to rejoin
    the bank at a later date.
H. A member will lose the right to utilize the Sick Leave Bank if his employment with the
    Baltimore City Public School System is terminated.
I. All contributions will remain in force and cannot be returned even upon cancellation of a
    membership. In no case will the granting of leave from the bank cause a member to receive
    more than his or her annual salary.
J. All unused sick leave days in the bank at the end of a school year shall be carried over to the
    next school year.


15.5 Job-Related Injury
A. Employees who sustain injuries occurring in connection with their assigned duties and not as
    a result of their own negligence shall be eligible for leave of absence without loss of pay up to
    a maximum of one year from the date of the job-related injury. The leave is subject to the
    approval of the Board’s MRO or designee. The employee shall submit to re-examination by
    the Board’s MRO or designee periodically as required, but at least every three (3) months. In
    any case where the injury requires an extended leave of absence the Board may request that
    the employee be considered for retirement because of accidental disability.

   No employee shall be entitled to receive Workers’ Compensation benefits for temporary total
   disability during the time, or covering the period, that said employee is receiving his or her full
   salary for job injury leave as outlined above.

B. Absence due to disability resulting from an assault will be covered by an assault leave. This
   leave will not be charged to sick leave. The teacher will be in full pay status for the duration
   of the disability.
                                                 45
C. There will be a Joint Union/BCPSS Oversight Committee established to review all employees
   rejected or released on the basis of decisions made by the Board’s MRO or designee.
D. The Union and the Board’s MRO or designee shall meet quarterly or more frequently as needs
   dictate to review and discuss problems of unit members who must report to the clinic because
   of job-related injuries.

15.6 Personal Business Leave
A. An employee shall be granted one (1) day leave of absence each year for necessary personal
    business without loss of pay. If unused, such personal business leave shall be accumulated as
    sick leave, but not subject to annual sick leave conversion.
B. Each employee shall be permitted to use up to three (3) days per year of accumulated sick leave
    for necessary personal business which shall be non-cumulative from year-to-year and shall be
    treated as sick leave.
C. A request for personal business leave either on the day before or after a holiday or on the two
    (2) days preceding the last day for students in June may be honored only upon satisfactory
    justification by the employee that said business cannot be rescheduled to a day other than those
    mentioned above. Recommendation for approval of the personal business leave mentioned in
    the above paragraph will be made by the school Principal to the Executive Director of
    Elementary/Middle or Secondary Schools, as appropriate.
D. Personal leave shall not be unreasonably denied provided that the employee requests such leave
    at least two (2) working days in advance. In bona fide emergency situations, the two (2) days’
    notice may be waived. Except as stipulated in paragraph C above, employees shall not be
    required to give explanation other than that the leave is being requested for personal business.

15.7 Field Trips
It is not the policy, when permission has been granted, to require teachers to use sick or personal
leave when they take students on field trips.

15.8 Other Leaves of Absence Without Pay
Employees may be granted leaves of absence without pay upon recommendation by the CEO and
approval of the Board of School Commissioners, according to the policies and procedures of the
Rules of the Board of School Commissioners.

15.9 Sabbatical Leave
A. Employees who have served as full-time employees for a period of seven (7) or more
    consecutive years, including probationary or elected service, in BCPSS may be granted
    sabbatical leaves of absence. The first such leave may be granted after the seventh (7th)
    consecutive year of active service, and additional leaves after each successive period of seven
    (7) years of active service. Accrued service shall not entitle any person to more than two (2)
    semesters of sabbatical leave in a period of eight (8) consecutive years.
B. A study leave of one (1) year in length or a military leave of two (2) years in length shall not
    be construed as breaking the continuity of services, but neither is to be counted as part of the
    seven (7) years service requirement.
C. A sabbatical leave shall be granted only to those persons who have been on active duty during
    the year immediately preceding the sabbatical leave year and who are on active duty at the
    time the leave is to be effective.
D. For purposes of determining eligibility for sabbatical leave, active service shall be construed
    as service of such length and quality as to qualify for a full service salary increment for each
    year. Time spent on sabbatical leave shall count towards eligibility for further movement on

                                                46
   the salary scale but shall not count as active service for purposes of determining eligibility for
   a subsequent sabbatical leave.
E. Fully-degreed provisional teachers who subsequently are elected to tenure shall be permitted
   to count the two (2) years of provisional service to election as part of the period of seven (7)
   consecutive years of service.
F. Sabbatical leave may be granted for the purpose of study and travel or for such other purposes
   as may be recommended by the CEO and approved by the Board. Employees on sabbatical
   leaves may not enter into gainful employment except upon the approval of the CEO.
G. During the period of sabbatical leave, each staff member shall receive one-half (1/2) of his
   regular salary. In the cases of persons receiving salary differentials, an additional deduction
   of fifty percent (50%) of the salary differential shall be made for the period of the leave.
H. During the period of sabbatical leave, each employee shall be entitled to all of the privileges
   and opportunities which he would enjoy if he were on active duty. Upon his return from leave,
   he shall have the same right of returning to the position he occupied prior to his leave which
   he would enjoy had he remained on active duty. He shall not be transferred in the normal
   course of administrative operation.
I. The method of selecting staff members to be granted sabbatical leaves shall be as follows: In
   order to continue the services of the schools at a high level, the number of staff members to
   whom sabbatical leave is granted shall be determined at any time by the number of qualified
   substitutes who are available for replacement purposes. From among all those staff members
   eligible for leave by virtue of their service, those individuals who have served longest in
   BCPSS without receiving any sabbatical leave shall be given first consideration. The Board
   shall grant sabbatical leave to some qualified applicants. The sum of individuals on leave in
   any one (1) year is not to exceed three percent (3%) of the unit. This maximum quota of three
   percent (3%) shall be distributed throughout the system so as to prevent any undue absence
   from any one (1) school, from any single department within a school, or from any single
   division of the school system.
J. Any employee to whom sabbatical leave is granted shall be required, as a condition of the
   granting of the leave, to agree to return to BCPSS for at least one (1) year following the
   expiration of his leave. As an option to this service requirement, any individual may, if he so
   elects, return to the BCPSS the salary which he received during the period of leave.
K. Application for sabbatical leave must be submitted to the Chief Human Capital Officer no later
   than the close of the work day on December 15. Action by the Board shall be completed no
   later than June 1 of the school year.
L. Notices shall be sent to all applicants of the Board’s action on their request, and stated reasons
   for denial of a teacher’s request shall be provided in writing to the individual with a copy to
   the Union.
M. Individuals on Sabbatical Leave shall receive an Administrative Satisfactory or Effective, with
   no AUs, on the annual evaluation. Coursework taken during Sabbatical Leave may be banked
   for AUs to be applied at the next evaluation following return from Sabbatical.
N. The Board shall notify the Union on an annual basis, on February 1 of all applications for
   sabbatical leave and all grants of sabbatical leave.

15.10 Professional Meetings
With the permission of the CEO, leave without loss of pay shall be granted to employees in order
to attend professional meetings.

15.11 Matrimony
Leave of absence, for the purpose of marriage, shall be granted with loss of full pay and shall not
exceed ten (10) working days.
                                                 47
15.12 Military Spouse
An employee may obtain a leave of absence with loss of full pay for a period not to exceed twenty-
five (25) working days in any one (1) school year to spend time with the spouse who is in military
service outside the Baltimore area. Matrimony leave within the same school year shall be included
in these twenty-five (25) days. Unless the employee returns to duty on or before the expiration
date, resignation may be requested by the CEO.

15.13 Family Leave
A. Teachers shall at their request be granted a leave of absence without pay for child-bearing
    and/or child-rearing for such period of time as they specify but not to exceed one (1) year.
    Upon application, said leave may be extended up to, but not beyond, the beginning of the
    school year (September 1) following the child’s third birthday.
B. Application for such leave shall be made as soon as possible but normally at least ninety (90)
    days prior to the effective date.
C. Teachers adopting an infant shall, at their request, receive the same leave without pay as set
    forth in paragraph A above which shall commence upon the teacher’s receiving de facto
    custody of said infant or earlier, if necessary, to fill the requirements for adoption. Application
    for adoption leave shall be made as soon as possible.
D. Upon expiration of leave, an employee’s reassignment to active duty shall be contingent upon
    the existence of a vacancy for which the employee is qualified. Exceptions to the foregoing
    may be made in the case of an employee whose parental leave begins during a given semester,
    as follows:
    a. If parental leave begins prior to October 1 or March 1 of a given semester, the employees
        shall be returned to the previous position at the beginning of the following semester.
    b. If the parental leave begins on or after October 1 or March 1 of a given semester, the
        employee shall be returned to his previous position at the beginning of the following
        semester or of the next following semester.
        The above two exceptions shall apply provided that the employee notifies the Chief Human
        Capital Officer of his intention at least twenty (20) calendar days prior to the start of the
        semester of his planned return.

15.14 Graduation Exercises
A. Leave of absence for attendance at senior high school or college graduation exercises shall be
    granted an employee as follows:
    1. A one (1) day leave of absence without loss of pay to attend his own graduation.
    2. A one (1) day leave of absence without loss of pay to attend the graduation exercises of
       spouse or child.
    3. All other graduation leave shall be with loss of full pay provided that such leave may be
       charged to personal business leave with no loss of pay if the employee so elects.
    4. The leave that is available under this Sec. 15.14. shall be for a graduation exercise that is
       to occur on a regularly scheduled work day, unless the institution at which the graduation
       exercise is to occur is at a distance of more than one hour and one half by automobile travel
       from Baltimore City.

15.15 Religious Holidays
A. An employee may be absent for two full days with pay for the observance of traditional and
    customary religious holidays. Such holidays are to be interpreted as those days when members
    of the employee’s religious group, in the observance of their fundamental beliefs, engage in
    religious duties and do not carry on their regular professional or business activities.
                                                  48
B. Religious leave may be charged to personal business leave with no loss of pay if the employee
   so elects.

15.16 Bereavement Leave
A. In the case of the death of a parent, grandparent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
    daughter-in-law, brother, sister, husband, wife, child or grandchild (including those in this
    group who are step, half-blood or foster relations), or in the case of the death of a member of
    the immediate household of an employee, the employee shall be granted a leave of absence
    without loss of pay for a period not exceeding four (4) consecutive working days beginning
    with the date of death except that no day during this period on which the employee has been on
    duty shall be counted in computing the length of the leave. If the funeral or memorial service
    is not scheduled to occur within four (4) days after the date of death, the employee may bifurcate
    the four (4) days of leave to attend such subsequently scheduled funeral or memorial service.




   -                                                                                    -
B. In the case of the death of a relative not mentioned in Paragraph A above, the employee shall
   be granted a one (1) day leave of absence with no loss of pay to attend the funeral or memorial
   service. Additional days for this purpose may be charged to personal business leave with no
   loss of pay if the employee so elects.

15.17 Funeral of Member of Faculty
Two (2) members of a school faculty may be designated by a school faculty to attend the funeral
of a member of the faculty without loss of pay.

15.18 Military Leave
A. A military leave of absence shall be granted with loss of full pay to employees who enlist, are
    inducted, or are recalled as reserve officers, members of the organized reserves, or members
    of the National Guard for service in our military forces.
B. Employees, including those persons assigned to positions between the close of school in June
    and the opening of school in September, who have been inducted or enlisted in the Armed
    Services, or have been recalled as reserve officers, members of the organized reserves, or
    members of the National Guard for service in our military forces before they report for active
    duty in BCPSS shall be given military leave of absence.
C. Employees who enter military service shall, upon return to service with BCPSS, be assigned
    to a position equivalent to that held when leave commenced.
D. Leaves of absence to permit an individual to engage in civilian work related to some military
    activity shall not be approved except where unusual circumstances exist.
E. All employees who are members of the military or naval establishments of the United States
    of America or of the State of Maryland shall be granted leave on those days during which they
    shall be engaged in any military or naval duty to which they shall be ordered by proper
    authority, not to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days in any year except by special
    recommendation of the CEO and special action of the Board, without loss of pay for the
    working days included in the leave.
F. A one (1) day leave of absence without loss of pay shall be granted for a physical examination
    when required by military authorities.

15.19 Benefit Continuation
During an unpaid leave of absence, the employee shall be carried on the payroll on inactive status
and, at his discretion, may make arrangements with the Department of Finance to continue the
group health benefits at the employee’s expense. Employees shall not accrue any leave time until

                                                 49
they return to active pay status. The Board shall have no obligation to provide insurance benefits
during an unpaid leave of absence.

15.20 Jury Duty
Employees who are required to perform jury service in any court (city, federal or county) shall be
paid their regular salary. Employees shall notify their appropriate administrator at the time they
first receive notice that they may be called to serve as a juror.

15.21 Leave for BCPSS/Union Service.
The Board and the Union agree that the Board will cover the cost of the salary and benefits for up
to three (3) employees providing services to both the Union and BCPSS. The Board shall provide
no fewer than four (4) classrooms in the Center for Quality Teaching for the BTU Professional
Development Center.

15.22 Leave-Miscellaneous

Employees who are on extended leave greater than 60 days, except employees who are placed on
administrative leave with pay by the CEO, shall receive an “administrative Satisfactory/Effective”
rating on their annual evaluation with no AUs. Coursework taken during extended leave may be
banked for AUs to be applied at the next evaluation following return from extended leave.

Section 15.23 Bifurcation of FMLA Bonding Leave

The Board recognizes the importance of parental bonding time with newborn children or after
placement of a child for adoption or foster care, and further recognizes that employees may wish to
bifurcate their available FMLA leave between time immediately after birth/adoption/placement and
a later period that better facilitates bonding in their particular situation. To this end, employees
may apply to bifurcate their available FMLA bonding leave into two separate blocks of time, one
immediately adjacent to birth/adoption/placement and a second ending no later than one (1) year
after birth/adoption/placement. In the event of a material change in circumstances occurring within
two (2) weeks after birth/adoption/placement, an employee who had been approved for bonding
leave to be used in a single block of time may apply to interrupt that leave period due to such
changed circumstances, return to duty for a period of time, and then resume the leave for the
remainder of such approved leave ending no longer than one (1) year after
birth/adoption/placement.


ARTICLE XVI
General

16.1 Effects of Agreement
This Agreement shall constitute Board policy on the specific subject matters contained herein for
the terms of said Agreement and the Board will carry out the commitments contained herein and
give them full force and effect as Board policy. The Board will amend its Administrative
Regulations and/or policy statements and take such other legal action as may be necessary in order
to give full force and effect to the provisions of this Agreement.

16.2 Notification and Discussion
Before the Board adopts a policy which affects teachers’ wages, hours or any other conditions of
employment not covered by the terms of this Agreement, the Board will notify the Union in writing
                                                50
of its intentions at least thirty (30) days prior to the anticipated change. The Union will have the
right to discuss with the Board the anticipated change provided it files such a request with the
Board within ten (10) days after the receipt of said notice.

16.3 Printing of Agreement
The Union shall make arrangements for the printing of this Agreement, the cost of which the Board
agrees to share with the Union. The Agreement shall be printed in a timely manner, within thirty
(30) to forty-five (45) days of execution of the Agreement.

16.4 Negotiations Procedure
A. On or about November 1 of the year preceding the expiration year of the then current
    Agreement, either of the parties desiring to open negotiations for a successor Agreement shall
    give written notice of such an intention to the other party.
B. The negotiations shall be geared insofar as possible to the budget-making process. The parties
    agree that the first negotiation session following the notice required above shall be convened
    not later than the first week of December of the year preceding the expiration year of the then
    current Agreement. Subsequent negotiating sessions and procedures shall be established by
    mutual consent.

16.5 Just Cause
No teacher shall be disciplined, reduced in rank or compensation, suspended, or discharged
without just cause. All discipline shall take place at a meeting called for that purpose. Teachers
shall have the right to have a union representative present at any such meeting.

The BTU shall be sent a copy of all statements of charges for suspension or dismissal at the same
time the statement of charges is mailed to the employee.

16.6 Master Plan
The Board and the Union agree that it is in the best interest of all stakeholders in the BCPSS that
the parties to this Agreement work towards the realization of the goals set forth in the BCPSS
Master Plan and its updates.

ARTICLE XVII

Student Discipline

17.1 Student Disciplinary Procedure
The Board’s procedure on student disciplinary problems shall continue in force.

17.2 Student Discipline Committee
    A. The Board shall make every effort to provide system-wide training on classroom
       management and a positive school climate.
    B. There should be a transition orientation for every sixth and ninth grader to assist students
       in adjusting to new school environments.
    C. There should be immediate actions taken to reduce inappropriate special education
       referrals, particularly at the elementary school level.
    D. The Board shall make every effort to provide staff development for teachers involuntarily
       transferred to a different school level.
    E. The Board and the Union shall form a committee composed of five (5) individuals
       appointed by the Union and five (5) individuals appointed by the CEO and five (5) students
                                                51
       selected by ASCBC for the purpose of considering issues related to student culture, climate,
       equity, social justice, and discipline. The committee shall meet no later than August 1,
       2019 and as many additional times as is necessary in order to present a report to the CEO
       and Union President by no later than October 31, 2019 in order to make appropriate
       recommendations to the Board.

17.3 Classroom Discipline
Teachers are responsible for the maintenance of discipline in the classroom through the use of
appropriate instructional activities and materials, classroom management techniques, human
relations skills, and referrals to available resources. However, there may be times when a student’s
behavior is disruptive to the educational program, and in such situations the teacher may remove
the student from the classroom and refer the student to the Principal or his designee. The student
will not be returned to the referring teacher’s classroom until the principal or his designee has
discussed the student’s misbehavior with the teacher at the earliest mutually agreed upon time.

ARTICLE XVIII

Unit Subdivisions

18.1 Home and Hospital Teachers
A. Full-time Home and Hospital Teachers will continue to be paid on the same salary scale as
    other teachers in the system.



                                           --
B. The duty day for teachers and other teacher-level personnel working directly with children in
    the Home and Hospital Instruction School shall be the same as other teachers.
C. Home teachers shall be allowed two and a half (2 ½) hours per week of scheduled time to
    prepare lessons.
D. Hospital schools shall receive service by the interoffice mail system four (4) days per week.
E. All Home and Hospital teachers (full time/field assigned) shall be issued a cellular telephone.
    The telephone shall be used for emergency situations.
F. Home and Hospital Teachers shall receive the duty-free lunch period established in Section 7.4
    of this Agreement.
G. Home and Hospital Teachers in a school setting shall be allotted the preparation time outlined
    in section 7.8 of this Agreement rather than the time referenced in (C) above.


18.2 Library Media Specialist
A. The Board shall provide students with library resource services in every school staffed by a
     certified School Library Media Specialist.
B. There shall be a joint committee composed of school-based Library Media Specialists and
     personnel from the Office of Media and Technology to review job descriptions for School
     Library Media Specialists and develop a format for evaluation. The report of this committee
     shall be implemented upon completion and adoption by the Board.
C. Any committee formed by the CEO or his designee to study and evaluate School Library




-
     Media Specialists in the school system shall have no less than three (3) School Library Media
     Specialist representatives on it.
D. The Board shall make every effort to assign School Library Media Specialists to one (1)
     school location. If assigned to two (2) or more school locations, the Board shall make every
     effort to assign School Library Media Specialists to schools in the same grade band so that
     they serve two (2) or more elementary schools, two (2) or more K-8 Schools, two (2) or more

                                                52
     middle schools, or two (2) or more high schools “Middle Schools” are schools with grades
     6 to 8. “High Schools” are schools with grades 9 to 12.
E.   Principals shall continue the present practice of using fixed scheduling in elementary schools,
     fix-flexible in pre-k-8 schools, and flexible scheduling in high school to include planning
     time and class scheduling. Library Media Specialists shall not be regularly assigned advisory
     classes or homeroom classes.
F.   The current Book, Audio/Visual Technology Review Committee shall continue for the
     duration of the Agreement.
G.   Library instructional classes shall not be interrupted for purposes of distributing or repairing
     audio/visual or other technological equipment.
H.   School Library Media Specialists shall be responsible for submission of reports
     commensurate with their responsibilities.
I.   Except in an emergency, no School Library Media Specialists shall be required to teach
     courses other than those in their area of responsibility or to substitute for absent teachers.
     Allegations of abuse or misuse of this provision shall be promptly addressed by the CEO or
     his/her designee.



                                                                                              -
J.   Materials and supplies purchased with media center funds shall be distributed to the School
     Library Media Center.
K.   The School Library Media Specialist shall be allotted two (2) consecutive days per Library
     Media Center included in the Specialist’s assignment per year solely for the purpose of the
     inventory of Library Media Center materials.
L.   Within a flexible scheduling model in conjunction with the schedule models fixed, fix-flexed,
     or flexible, specific grade/class assignments shall be the professional decision of the
     principal, in cooperation with the School Library Media Specialist, based on the individual
     program of the individual school.
M.    School Library Media Specialists shall be included on any Library and Media Services
     curriculum writing committees.
N.   School Library Media Specialists shall have a computer for book circulation, completion of
     reports, and to meet every day librarian duties.




                                                                                      -
18.3 School Social Workers



     -
A. The Baltimore City Public Schools’ Office of Human Capital shall review all professional
    position announcements prior to their publications to determine whether a licensed social
    worker is appropriate for the position.
B. The Board shall provide appropriate supervision by Maryland Board of Social Work
    Examiners “LCSW-C Board Approved Supervisor” and School Social Workers will be
    observed by a qualified examiner who must be a School Social Work Supervisor and/or School
    Social Work Coordinator .
C. School Social Workers shall be provided with confidential, secure, dedicated, work space for
    each school to which they are assigned when counseling and/or assessing children, as well as
                                                                                                  ■

                                                        --
    access to a telephone, printer, desk, lockable file cabinet, and a computer with special education
    programs.
D. School Social Workers shall be provided with sufficient office supplies to perform their



                                         -
    assigned tasks.
E. The Board shall seek the input of the training and expertise of the School Social Workers in
    the planning and implementation of Board programs designed to ameliorate some of the factors
    that impact upon the total school community such as trauma, social emotional learning,
    attendance, the drop out rate, teen pregnancy and preventing child abuse and/or neglect, teen
    killings, substance abuse, and suicide as well as alternative educational settings.

                                                 53
F. Baltimore City Public Schools shall provide fifteen (15) hours per year of Category 1 approved
   continuing education units , three (3) hours of which must be Ethics, through the Related
   Services Unit.
G. By mutual agreement of the School Social Workers and supervisors, flex time may be allowed
   for emergency hospital placements and other crises that require after school work.
H. Related Service Provider supervisors/coordinators shall have input into use of and planning for
   five (5) of ten (10) systemic professional development days for clinicians.
I. The Board and the Union shall form a committee with four (4) representatives appointed by
   the Board and four (4) representatives appointed by the Union to develop safety guidelines for
   Social Workers while conducting home visits.
J. School Social Workers shall focus on their clinical scope of practice. They shall not serve as
   IEP chairs.

18.4   Department Heads

A. Department Heads shall not be required to act as the school disciplinarians.
B. Department Heads shall be released from teaching assignments as follows:

   Size of Full-Time Staff             Classification        Reduced Teaching Load
            4-6                             IV        5 Periods/Week
            7-9                             III       10 Periods/Week
           10-15                            II        15 Periods/Week
      16 and over                            I        20 Periods/Week

C. If as a result of reduction in the number of full-time staff, a Department Head position is
eliminated said Department Head shall be considered on layoff status for said position only. No
other employee shall be hired as a Department Head until the Department Heads in the same school
on layoff status have been recalled, have declined and/or have failed to accept a recall. The fillings
of said vacancy shall be based on qualifications and seniority. Department Heads reassigned in
non-Department Head positions shall continue their Department Head differential for one (1) year.

18.5 Counselors
A. Newly ordered file cabinets for Counselors will have locks. No Counselors shall be held
    accountable, unless through their own negligence, for the loss of school records unless there is
    a secure place for storage.
B. Counselors, although generally working the same overall hours as teachers, shall be allowed
    to use flexible hours by written agreement with their school-based supervisor if it improves
    their service to pupils or in crisis response that results in after hours work. Counselors who
    are required to work beyond the duty day where their presence is required in a school or at a
                                                        I
    school function shall either be provided flex time or be paid a stipend at the teacher rate for all
    hours worked.
C. The duty of maintaining school attendance records and of coordinating school transportation
    services shall not be assigned to Counselors.
D. Counselors shall not be required, except in an emergency, to handle homeroom assignments,
    schedule or score large-scale tests, prepare school master schedules, complete entries and
    withdrawals and schedule conferences between classroom teachers and parents. Cross
    reference Section 7.7.
E. Every effort will be made, in accordance with the BCPSS Master Plan adopted and updated by
    the Board, to provide school counselors with access to computers, telephones, private
    consultation space and clerical services.
                                                  54
F. The Board will make every effort to reduce the case-load of Counselors to align with the
   American School Counselor Association guidelines. In furtherance of this objective, a
   committee shall be established consisting of three (3) members selected by the Union and three
   (3) members selected by the Board to review the current status of the effort.
G. The Board and the Union will form a committee with three (3) members appointed by each to
   review the utilization and effectiveness of school counseling services and make



                                                             -
   recommendations to improve services to students. One additional task of the committee shall
   be to develop a counselor evaluation instrument.
H. Substitutes shall be hired for counselors out for long-term absence.
I. Counselors shall have access to clerical services.
J. A new evaluation instrument for Counselors shall be developed with input by a committee
   comprised of Board and Union representation and, if approved, for implementation,
   development, and piloting by no later than the beginning of the 2018-2019 School Year.

18.6 Educational Associates.
A. Educational Associates positions will be evaluated to determine their proper responsibilities
    including whether the position shall be performed on a ten (10) or twelve (12) month basis.
    Those positions which are determined to be 10-month shall have their salary level adjusted in
    the amount of 10.5/12 as compensation for following administrative hours, when they work in
    an office.
B. Employees determined as filling ten (10) month positions shall, if they work beyond ten (10)
    months, perform only special functions.
C. Regularly scheduled work performed during July and August shall only be performed by
    twelve (12) month employees.
D. Ten (10) month employees who work at their normal assignments during the summer shall be
    compensated at their regular daily rate.
E. Ten (10) month employees wishing to work during the summer, and for whom the Board
    cannot offer summer work, will have their names placed on a list maintained by the Board by
    office location. The Board shall offer in writing, to other City agencies, the opportunity to
    solicit the expertise and skill of these employees.
F. By mutual agreement of the staff and supervisors, flex time may be allowed at those work sites
    where it is feasible.
G. Educational Associates who are required to work on weekends or holidays shall be paid an
    additional amount based on their daily rate of pay for all hours worked on these days with a
    guaranteed minimum of four (4) hours or the number of hours worked.
H. When schools are closed due to inclement weather, all Educational Associates shall be released
    as soon as their responsibilities have been met.

18.7 Speech-Language Pathologists

A. The recommendations of the American Speech-Language Hearing Association that caseloads
   not exceed forty (40) students per Speech-Language Pathologist shall be considered when
   scheduling.
B. The Board will attempt to identify, in advance, those individuals who wish CFY supervision
   and the Speech-Language Pathologists with ASHA certification to provide this supervision.
   Principals will be apprised of the availability of this service and arrangements will be made
   through the appropriate Network Team members. The Speech-Language Pathologists
   identified to provide this supervision should be given consideration for schedule adjustments.
C. The Speech-Language Pathologists shall not be assigned homeroom duties nor will they act as
   substitutes in the absence of classroom teachers.
                                               55
D. The supervision of student clinicians and CFY candidates shall continue to be voluntary.
E. Professional development sessions for Speech-Language Pathologists shall be held during
   school hours. These sessions shall consist of discipline specific presentations on professional
   topics, policies and procedures and allow for the exchange of information between and among
   Speech-Language Pathologists.
F. Speech-Language Pathologists shall be eligible to apply for I.E.P. team chairperson positions.
G. Speech-Language Pathologists shall be provided office space and access to a telephone, copy
   machine, desk, lockable file cabinets for secure storage of records as required by IDEA.
   Speech-Language Pathologists shall be provided with access to computers, peripherals, and


•
   appropriate software to be used in assessment therapy and administrative processes.
H. The program environment of the Speech-Language Pathologist shall be a private, quiet location
   in order that students may receive effective therapy in accordance with their IEPs. Every effort
   shall be made to provide a sufficient number of tables and chairs of appropriate size for students
   receiving Speech-Language Services.
I. The opportunity to conduct assessments, FAPE services, ESY Treatment Services, special
   projects, home and hospital services, and infant and toddler services during school, after



                                                                                             -
   school, and summer will be offered first to Baltimore City Public Schools Pathologists before



                             -
   being offered to contractual personnel.
J. Speech-Language Pathologists shall be evaluated as Clinical Staff. Clinical skills will only be
   evaluated by a certified licensed Speech-Language Pathologist. Should the Board organize a
   committee to review, amend or revise the evaluation instrument or evaluation procedure for
   Speech-Language Pathologists, one member of the committee shall be a “teacher level”
   Speech-Language Pathologist who shall be appointed by the Union.
K. The Board shall provide each Speech-Language Pathologist with copies of valid, current tests
   and test protocols in quantities appropriate to the number and diversity of students assigned to
   each Speech-Language Pathologist. These materials shall be for the exclusive use of the
   Speech-Language Pathologist.
L. Speech-Language Pathologists shall receive the clinicians’ stipend.
M. Related Service Provider supervisors/coordinators shall have input into use of and planning for
   five (5) of ten (10) systemic professional development days for clinicians.
N. The Board shall reimburse Speech-Language Pathologists for the cost of Speech-Language
   Pathology Maryland Department of Health State Licensure in accordance with the provisions
   of Section 6-112.1 of the Education Article.
O. The Board shall provide ten (10) Maryland state approved Continuing Education Units (CEUs)
   per school year through the systemic professional development days for Speech-Language
   Pathologists.


18.8 Physical Education

A. Physical Education committee to study elementary, middle, and high school physical education
   programs, the development and utilization of instructional staff, materials and equipment used
   in the program, with the object of recommending to the CEO and the Board better ways to
   deliver services to students. The Physical Education committee shall be made up of three (3)
   certified Physical Education members designated by the Union and three (3) members by the
   Board. The committee shall begin on November 1, 2017 and end on July 1, 2018. Dates may
   be extended by mutual agreement. The committee shall reconvene every other year.
B. Transfers of Physical Education teachers shall be limited in frequency. The provisions in
   Article 7.7 shall apply to Physical Education Teachers.

                                                 56
C. Guidelines promulgated by the CEO for the scheduling of students with disabilities, in need of
   significant accommodations, and/or in alternative programs in physical education classes shall
   be distributed to Physical Education teachers.
D. The Board shall provide professional development for Physical Education Teachers. There
   shall be an opportunity for Physical Education teachers to attend sessions to receive training
   on teaching physical education to children at all skill and developmental levels.
E. Elementary, middle, and high school Physical Education teachers shall be given input into the
                 I       -
   development of schedules in each school in which they are assigned.
F. Appropriate adult supervision shall be provided in male and female locker rooms, and each
   school, in consultation with the School Improvement Team, is responsible for developing a
   support plan.
G. Only qualified Physical Education substitutes shall be provided for Physical Education
   teachers on long-term illness.
H. Every teacher who has coaching responsibilities shall be given traveling time for reporting to
   that assigned duty, provided such release time shall not interfere with the assigned teaching
   responsibilities of the teacher.
I. The provisions of Section 6.1 shall apply to Physical Education teachers.
J. Within available resources, a procedure shall be established to expedite the repair of Physical
   Education equipment.
K. In the event that Physical Education teachers are required by the principal to use instructional
   time for various school related activities, including but not limited to school-wide related
   programs, field days, culminating events, and athletic exhibition games, coverage will be
   provided for the teacher’s schedule.

18.9 Athletics

A. It is the responsibility of the Director of Athletics to make proper requests for assistance in
   crowd control at interscholastic athletic activities.
B. Game administration and organization shall be the responsibility of the Director of Athletics.
C. All Coaches shall meet the minimum requirements established by the CEO. Priority shall be
   given to employees of the Baltimore City Public Schools who meet the requirements. All
   coaches, including those who are not regular BCPSS employees, shall be paid in accordance
   with the approved coaching stipends set forth in Addendum II.
D. No Coach shall be disciplined, reduced in rank or compensation, suspended, or discharge
   without just cause.
E. One representative appointed by the Union shall serve as a member of the Rules on Athletics
   Revision Committee.
F. An absence of a Coach on a regular work day, excluding sick leave, shall not prevent said
   Coach from performing his duties as a Coach on that particular day.
G. The Board will explore the possibility of paying Coaches and Directors of Athletics separate
   paychecks for coaching.
H. The Board shall provide professional security for all athletic contests deemed necessary by the
   Board.
I. All directors of athletics serving in MPSSAA member schools under the purview of the
   Board’s Interscholastic Athletic Programming who are also assigned as physical education
   teachers shall be granted one (1) forty-five (45) minute planning period per day for
   inter-scholastic athletic duties in addition to the number of planning periods granted to physical
   education teachers in their schools.

18.10 Business Education
                                                 57
A. Business Education teacher skills shall be considered in determining their assignments.
B. In senior high schools, the Board shall provide serviceable computers appropriate to the
   number of students scheduled in the typing class.
C. All available business education equipment shall be distributed equitably according to need
   throughout the system.

18.11 Career and Technology Education

A. The Board shall maintain compliance with applicable established safety requirements and will
   continue its efforts to assign students where there are adequate work stations.
B. The Board shall maintain compliance with and adherence to the standards of the Maryland
   Occupational Safety and Health Act. The Board shall eliminate obvious safety hazards which
   are brought to its attention which may exist in shop areas, such as those involving storage
   facilities for volatile fluids.
C. The Board shall comply with curriculum standards approved and mandated by the State Board
   of Education.
D. In high schools, the Board shall provide appropriate technology for each student and teacher
   in the classroom. Teachers shall receive an inventory of all technology and equipment
   provided for their courses.
E. The Board shall maintain on its website a comprehensive list of guidelines for achieving trade
   and professional certification.
F. A special Career and Technology Education committee shall be established that is composed
   of three (3) members selected by the Union and three (3) members selected by the Board and
   shall meet quarterly with the Director of Career Readiness.
G. Every effort shall be made that Career and Technology Education teachers shall teach no more
   than three (3) different course titles per semester.
H. Career and Technology and Education teachers shall be provided with professional
   development to support establishing and maintaining partnerships for the Program Advisory
   Committees (PACs) of each pathway and to enhance student apprenticeships and career
   opportunities.

18.12 Special Education

A. A special Teacher-Board Committee composed of six (6) members selected by the Union and
   six (6) members selected by the Board, shall be continued to advise the appropriate Director
   of Special Education on the following areas:
   1. Curriculum.
   2. Responsibilities and duties of teachers providing services for students receiving special
       education.
   3. Supervision of Special Education teachers.
   4. The availability of appropriate materials and supplies for a support system for Special
       Education teachers will be continued.
   5. Appropriate assignment and use of Paraprofessionals.
   6. The special education classes in relation to the severity of disability and intensity of
       services.
   7. The issue of inclusion.
   8. A series of Special Education in-service work-shops shall be provided by the Board for the
       following classifications of employees:
              Non-Special Education Teachers
                                               58
               Administrators
               Educational Assistants
   The topics of said workshops shall be based on the result of current assessment of needs forms.
   The Committee may continue its work in succeeding school years.
B. The resource bank previously developed for use by Special Education teachers shall be
   continued. Such a bank will include testing materials needed to perform the appropriate
   Special Education assessments and services. These materials are to be located at an appropriate
   central office for use by teachers. Materials on loan to Special Education teachers are to be
   treated as any other BCPSS property.
C. In-service programs in special education for teachers shall continue.
D. All Special Educators will be provided with Maryland Online training.
E. A calendar of Special Education staff development activities shall be issued.
F. The Board will provide training in Special Education discipline for new teachers and teachers
   in need of assistance.
G. Training in vocational career education will be available to secondary Special Education
   teachers.
H. The Board will provide training for all staff on the new graduation requirements and their
   impact on Special Education students.
I. to programs for students with emotional disabilities shall have access to psychiatric
   consultation resource services for their students on a regular basis.
J. Every effort shall be made to distribute caseloads equitably at each school site at the beginning
   of each school year.
K. Every effort shall be made to not have Special Education teachers perform IEP Team Associate
   duties, such as scheduling and facilitating IEP meetings, completing prior written notice, or
   other IEP Team Associate responsibilities outside of entering the Evaluation Report and
   Determination of Initial Eligibility; Present Level of Academic Achievement and Functional
   Performance; instructional and assessment accommodations; supplementary aids, services,
   program modifications, and supports; goals and objectives, and services.
L. Upon notification to and approval from the Special Education Office, Special Education
   teachers who fulfill the majority of IEP Team Associate functions (such as scheduling and
   facilitating IEP meetings, completing prior written notice, etc.) on a regular and consistent
   basis at their school in addition to their special education caseload shall be paid on the IEP
   Team Associate pay scale.

18.13 Master Teachers

A. Master Teachers with full-time teaching duties shall not be expected to perform the full range
   of Master Teacher duties, as determined by the principal.

18.14 School Psychologists

                                                                                     -
  A. School Psychologists shall be provided with confidential work space when assessing and
     providing psychological services to children, as well as access to a telephone, desk, lockable
     file cabinet, a computer with special education programs, and access to sufficient supplies


                                                       •
     such as legal pads, pens, and pencils, staplers, tape, paperclips, envelopes, file folders,
     assessment tools and materials, including, test kits, test protocols, rating scales, and test
     administration manuals, etc. to perform assigned tasks.
  B. School Psychologists shall be provided, in a timely manner, with any policy or procedural
     changes made by the Board regarding their areas of concern such as suspension, attendance,
     etc.


                                                59
 C. By mutual agreement of the school psychologist and supervisors, flex time may be allowed
    for those work sites where it is feasible.




                                                                                          -
 D. The Baltimore City Public School System will provide for the storage with working locks of
    confidential information.
 E. The individual psychological services caseload, as recorded by Maryland Online, and the
    504 caseload will be used to help in the determination of the number of school assignments,
    for individual school psychologists, with consideration being given for the additional time
    spent in preparing for and conducting of IEP Team meetings and associated responsibilities



                                                                                          -
    which include assessments as documented by monthly statistics. Monthly statistics shall be



     -
    based on the best practice guidelines of the National Association of School Psychologists.
 F. Provided BCPSS School Psychologists agree to a productivity standard set by the Executive
    Director of Special Education and Student Support Services, the school system shall not
    contract to outside contractors for summer employment until all currently employed School
    Psychologists have been offered the job.
 G. Professional learning communities for School Psychologists, including peer consultation,
    group consultation, as well as assessment case support shall take place on a regular basis.
 H. School Psychologist supervisor/coordinators shall have input into use of and planning for
    five (5) of ten (10) systemic professional development days for clinicians.
 I. School Psychologists who are responsible for conducting psychological evaluations shall
    have access, on Board computers or laptops, to assessment scoring software.
 J. The Board shall provide at least ten (10) Maryland state approved Continuing Education
    Units (CEUs) per school year through the systemic professional development days for School
    Psychologists.

18.15 Unit I Area and Central Office Employees

A. Twelve (12) month employees shall receive two (2) days per month as vacation days.
The vacation days shall be taken at the discretion of the employee after consultation with his
immediate supervisor. Unused vacation days may be accumulated from year to year, with a
maximum accumulation of seventy-two (72) days. At the time of separation from City Service,
employees shall be paid in full for any accumulated vacation leave, except in cases of bona fide
indebtedness to the employer.
B. Twelve (12) month employees shall receive eighteen (18) sick days per year.
C. Twelve (12) month employees shall receive wages as described in Article 5, effective July 1,
of each contract year. In the event that the effective date of the salary adjustment falls within the
first half of the pay period, the employee shall receive the payment for the entire pay period. If
the effective date of the salary adjustment falls within the second half of the pay period, the
payment shall be made as of the next succeeding pay period.

18.16    Audiologists

A. The Board shall provide appropriate, operational, and portable audiological equipment for each
   Audiologist including, but not limited to, audiometer, tympanometer, otoacoustic emissions,
   and otoscope.



                -
B. The Board shall continue to provide Audiological Assessment Centers, which will include



                                                      -
   diagnostic audiological equipment. Centers will provide area for private work space when
   testing and servicing children, running water, a computer with access to special education
   programs, basic office supplies, and access to a phone, copier and scanner.



                                                 60
C. The Board shall provide Audiologists with all of the necessary office and paper supplies as
   needed to perform their duties, and shall make every effort to provide each audiologist with
   office space with access to a phone.
D. The Board shall make every effort to provide at each of the audiologist’s school sites a
   computer with access to special education programs, and access to a copier/scanner/printer.
   Basic office supplies will be provided by the Board central office.
E. The Board shall provide for Audiologists all necessary supplies in order to effectively disinfect
   audiological equipment. Soap, towels, rubber gloves, alcohol and any approved cleaning
   agents, for the sanitation of audiological equipment shall be made available to Audiologists.
F. School site administrators shall provide access to loading ramps to facilitate the unloading and
   loading of audiological equipment. The Board shall provide a quiet workspace for delivering
   services in accordance with students’ IEPs and 504 plans, and for testing to be completed in
   schools as needed.
G. Professional development sessions for Audiologists shall be held during school hours. Two
   (2) of the ten (10) sessions shall consist of discipline specific presentations on professional
   topics, policies, and procedures and allow for the exchange of information between and among
   audiologists.
H. Related Service Provider supervisor/coordinators shall have input into use of and planning for
   five (5) of the ten (10) systemic professional development days for clinicians.
I. Audiologists shall receive the clinicians’ stipend.
J. Audiologists shall have access to copies of all necessary assessments and assessment protocols
   in quantities appropriate to the number and diversity of students assigned to each Audiologist.
K. When hiring new audiologists, the Board may include at least one (1) bargaining unit licensed
   audiologist during the interview process.
L. The Board shall provide at least ten (10) Maryland state approved Continuing Education Units
   (CEUs) per school year through the systemic professional development days for Audiologists.

18.17 Art
All Art Teachers

A. Art teachers should not be asked to perform any non-art related task that takes away from
   teaching assigned art classes.
B. Every effort will be made within budgetary and physical building constraints to provide each
   art classroom area with a sink, proper lighting, cabinets and a proper storage area.
C. The number of schools an elementary Art teacher services should be equitably distributed on
   a rotating basis. The Board will make every effort to schedule art classes consistent with the
   number of available spaces in classrooms.
D. Transfer of Art teachers shall be limited in frequency.
E. The Board will make every effort to schedule art classes consistent with the guidelines for the
   assignment of Special Education students to elective subjects.
F. The Board agrees to undertake study, with input from the Union, on the role, function and
   effect of an art therapy program.
G. There shall be an opportunity for Art teachers to attend sessions to receive training on teaching
   art to children with disabilities.
H. In consultation with the principal, Art teachers shall recommend the ordering of art supplies
   for their respective schools. These supplies shall be delivered to the school as expeditiously
   as possible. When existing building facilities permit, art equipment and supplies should be
   stored in a secure area separate from other supplies.
I. In-service workshops in Special Education and Staff Development for Art teachers shall be
   provided.
                                                61
J. A procedure shall be established to expedite the repair of art equipment.
K. Cross-reference Section 7.7.
L. Art teachers assigned to more than one school shall have one school designated for paycheck
   delivery purposes.
M. Certificated Art Teachers shall not be supplanted by contractors.
N. There shall be adequate work space for the number of students in each art class.

Elementary Art
A. The number and length of periods per day shall be consistent with system-wide standards as
   determined by the Board.
B. Each elementary art teacher shall be granted the same planning time as all other elementary



                                                                                            -
   teachers.
C. When special art exhibits are required by the principal which result in additional
   responsibilities for the Art teacher, such as art displays, banners for assemblies, and art
   installations in school buildings, coverage will be provided for the Art teacher’s homeroom if
   applicable.

Secondary Art

                                 -
A. Every effort will be made to ensure that Art teachers should not be required to teach more than



                                                                                            -
   three (3) different preparations.
B. When special art exhibits are required by the principal which result in additional
   responsibilities for the Art teacher, such as art displays, banners for assemblies, and art
   installations in school buildings, coverage will be provided for the Art teacher’s homeroom.

18.18 Music
All Music Teachers
A. Music teachers should not be asked to perform any non-music related task that takes away
    from teaching assigned music classes. Music teachers shall be assigned to schools consistent
    with system-wide standards as determined by the Board. Cross-reference Section 7.7.
B. The number of schools a Music teacher services should be equitably distributed on a rotating
    basis. If assigned to two (2) or more school locations, the Board shall make every effort to
    assign Music Teachers to schools in the same grade band so that they serve two (2) or more
    elementary schools, two (2) or more K-8 schools, two (2) or more middle schools, or two (2)



                                 -
    or more high schools.
C. Transfers will be limited in frequency.
D. Every effort will be made to ensure that music teachers should not be required to teach more
    than three (3) different preparations.
                                              I
E. Every music teacher shall have access to with a piano in playing condition , or a well-
    functioning keyboard at each school site.
F. In the event that Music teachers are required to provide practice during instructional time for
    various school related activities, including but not limited to school-related programs, system-
    wide programs and holiday programs, coverage will be provided for the teacher’s schedule.
G. The Board shall provide summer employment for teachers who are qualified to repair musical
    instruments. These teachers shall be compensated at the summer school rate and assigned and
    supervised by the Board’s designated representative.
H. Within available resources, the Board shall establish a procedure to expedite the repair of music
    equipment including but not limited to piano tuning, band/orchestra/general music classroom
    instruments/guitars, keyboards, etc. Instruments and equipment shall be maintained in a
    manner consistent with other content areas (i.e. science lab equipment.

                                                  62
I. Where existing building facilities permit, the Board shall provide adequate storage space that
   can be secured for storing music equipment and supplies.
J. Directors of performing ensembles shall be compensated at $1,000 per year for these
   performing groups.
K. Every effort shall be made to assign K-8 Music teachers no more than two (2) consecutive
   grade levels in one (1) instructional period.
L. Every effort shall be made that no Music class should exceed the largest core content class size
   in that school.

All Elementary Music Teachers
A. The number and length of the class period shall be consistent with system-wide guidelines as
    determined by the Board.
B. One complete set of Board adopted music textbooks per school shall be provided for the
    instruction of elementary music which shall include teachers’ manuals, with accompanying
    charts and records.

Elementary Vocal Music
Elementary Vocal Music teachers shall be given input into the development of schedules in each
school that they are assigned.

All Secondary Music Teachers
A. One complete set of Board adopted music textbooks per school shall be provided for the
    instruction of secondary music which shall include teachers’ manuals, with accompanying
    charts and records.
B. In every senior high school where available, the Board shall provide access to a computer for
    the music department.

Secondary Instrumental Music
A. Directors of secondary school bands, orchestras and choirs shall be compensated at $1,000 per
   year for these performing groups.
B. A joint committee shall be formed to evaluate and make recommendations to the CEO and
   Board on improving lighting and sound systems in secondary school auditoriums.

18.19 Occupational/Physical Therapists
                                                                            I
A. The Board and the Union recognize that this group of employees provides a necessary and vital
service to BCPSS, and toward that end, the Board will explore the possibility of providing staff
development for these employees. Every effort will be made, in accordance with the BCPSS
Master Plan adopted and updated by the Board, to provide Occupational/Physical Therapists with
access to computers, telephones, private consultation space and clerical services.
B. The supervision of student clinicians and CFY candidates shall be solely voluntary.
C. Professional development sessions for Occupational/Physical Therapists shall be held during
school hours. These sessions shall consist of discipline specific presentations on professional
topics, policies and procedures and all for the exchange of information between and among
Occupational/Physical Therapists.
D. Occupational/Physical Therapists shall be provided office space and access to a telephone, copy
machine, desk, lockable file cabinets for secure storage of records as required by IDEA.
Occupational/Physical Therapists shall be provided with access to computers, peripherals, and
appropriate software to be used in assessment therapy and administrative processes.
Occupational/Physical Therapists shall be provided with office space and every effort shall be
made for that office space to be consistent.
                                                63
-                                                                                 -
E. The program environment of the Occupational/Physical Therapist shall be a consistent, private,
and quiet location in order that pupils may receive effective therapy in accordance with their IEPs.
F. The opportunity to conduct assessments during school, after school, and summer will be offered
first to Baltimore City Public Schools Occupational/Physical Therapists before being offered to
contractual personnel.
G. Occupational/Physical Therapists shall be evaluated as Clinical Staff. Should the Board
organize a committee to review, amend or revise the evaluation instrument or evaluation procedure
for Occupational/Physical Therapists, at least one member of the committee shall be a “teacher
level” Occupational Therapist, and at least one member of the committee shall be a “teacher level”
Physical Therapist, both of whom shall be appointed by the Union.
H. The Board shall provide each Occupational/Physical Therapist with copies of valid, current
tests protocols, and test forms protocols in quantities appropriate to the number and diversity of
students assigned to each Occupational/Physical Therapist. These materials shall be for the
exclusive use of the Occupational/Physical Therapist.
I. Occupational/Physical Therapists shall receive the clinicians’ stipend set forth in the
Addendums.
J. Related Service Provider supervisors/coordinators shall have input into use of and planning for
five (5) of ten (10) systemic professional development days for clinicians.
K. The Board shall consider guidelines provided by the American Occupational Therapy
Association and the American Physical Therapy Association when determining caseload and
workload responsibilities.
L. Personal Protective Equipment, such as rubber gloves shall be provided to all
Occupational/Physical Therapists who work in close physical contact with students.

18.20 Consulting Teacher

Under the direction of the Principal, the consulting teacher is responsible for the student support
program. This means supplementing the instructional and behavioral management program for
identified special needs students.

18.21 Clinical Facilitators

Clinical Facilitators shall be paid a salary based on the appropriate Addendum I grade/step plus
the greater of the Department Head III differential or clinician differential.

18.22 National Board for Professional Teaching Standards Certification
Teachers who receive certification from the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards
(NBPTS) shall receive, in addition to all other salary and differential payments due to said teachers,
a sum of $4,000 in each year the teacher holds the certification.

18.23 IEP Team Associates

A. Schools and the Office of Special Education shall consider specialized programs (i.e., PAL,
   Life Skills, Pride, Early Learning Programs, Head Start, and Child Find) in determining the
   appropriate caseload for each IEP Team Associate in accordance with Fair Student Funding
   Guidance.
B. IEP Team Associates will be provided with access to a computer, shredder, copier/printer, fax
   machine and private telephone line. Additionally, the IEP Team Associate will be provided
   with a private separate room with a conference table, chairs, laptop, telephone and printer for
   holding IEP meetings.
                                                 64
C. IEP Team Associates will be provided with sufficient supplies. IEP Team Associates shall
   be supplied with working filing cabinets that can be locked at the end of the school year.
D. IEP Team Associate will have time built into the collaborative planning guidance to meet with
   the Special Educators and/or Related Service Providers to discuss important changes, and
   expectations concerning IEP process.
E. IEP Team Associates shall be given an annual survey by June 1 of each school year to provide
   input on the following year’s professional development to the Office of Special Education.
   The results of the survey shall be shared with IEP Team Associates by the first day of
   systemic professional development. The Office of Special Education will consider this input
   when providing IEP Team Associates with a calendar of topics to be discussed at systemic
   professional development.
F. The Office of Special Education will provide training in the IEP process/discipline for new
   IEP Team Associates or IEP Team Associates in need of supports.

Section 18.24 English for Speakers of Other Languages
A. A special Teacher-Board Committee composed of six (6) members selected by the Union and
   six (6) members selected by the Board, shall be established to advise the appropriate Director
   quarterly on the following topics:

       1. Curriculum and instructional support for Newcomer Instruction, Integrated Instruction,
       Sheltered Content Instruction, English for Speakers of Other Languages Class, and Dual
       Language or Two-Way Immersion programs.

       2. Responsibilities and duties of teachers providing services for students receiving English
       for Speakers of Other Languages services, including documentation requirements.

       3. Supervision and evaluation of English for Speakers of Other Languages teachers.

       4. The availability of appropriate materials and supplies for English for Speakers of Other
       Languages teachers.

       5. Appropriate assignment and use of Paraprofessionals.

       6. The intersections of English for Speakers of Other Languages, Special Education, and
       Gifted and Advanced Learning education.

       7. The issue of inclusion and co-teaching.

       8. In-service work-shops that will be provided by the Board for Non-English for Speakers
       of Other Languages Teachers.

B. The Board recognizes that the primary responsibility of English for Speakers of Other
   Languages teachers is teaching English Learners. Subject to Section 7.7, every effort shall be
   made to not have English for Speakers of Other Languages teachers serve as substitutes
   teachers for other contents.

C. In schools where English for Speakers of Other Languages services are provided, every effort
   will be made to facilitate collaborative planning between general education teachers and
   English for Speakers of Other Languages teachers.

                                                65
Article XVIII-A Opportunity Culture

Bargaining unit members assigned to the following positions shall have their base salary increased
by the following amounts for each school year that they are so assigned:

       Multi-Classroom Leader III $16,500
       Multi-Classroom Leader II $13,500
       Multi-Classroom Leader I   $10,000
       Master Team Reach Teacher $ 7,500
       (on MCL Team)
       Team Reach Teacher          $5,000
       (on MCL Team)

This increase in pay will be to the base salary of the employee and shall be reported to the Maryland
State Retirement System as the regular annual earnings of the employee.

ARTICLE XIX
Enterprise Schools

19.1 Enterprise Schools
The Board will honor Article XIX (Enterprise Schools). By definition, Enterprise Schools are
individual schools that have been granted authority to make decisions concerning their
administrative and educational operations. This authority is derived from the Board of School
Commissioners and the CEO. These decisions are to be made in accordance with Labor
Agreements.

19.2 School Oversight Committee
A.
1.      School improvement planning is a continuous process which provides direction and
parameters for school operations. More important, school improvement planning is a process that
allows key stakeholders the opportunity to collaborate on the mission, philosophy, goals, and
strategies for improved management, teaching, and learning at the school site.

2.      To fully exercise the instructional and management decision-making authority inherent in
the current school improvement process, each school must involve a School Oversight Committee
in the development and implementation of the school improvement plan. Each committee must
have core membership which shall include at least two teachers, one of which will be the Building
Representative.

3.     The School Oversight Committee shall also include a minimum of one paraprofessional.
Teachers who serve in the school improvement process shall be given an opportunity to interact
and collaborate without fear of reprisals.

4.     No teachers shall be transferred solely on the basis of their involvement in the School
Oversight Committee process.

B.
1. School Oversight Committees shall choose from the approved system-wide menu those
   activities which they determine best meet the needs of both students and teachers at each
                                                 66
   school.     The Executive Director of Partnerships, Communications and Community
   Engagement shall ensure that the School Oversight Committees are properly constituted and
   are functioning appropriately. Each School Oversight Committee’s recommendation of
   Professional Development Activities must be reduced to writing and submitted simultaneously
   to both the principal and the Executive Director by September 15. Included in the School
   Oversight Committee’s report shall be its recommendation about when Professional
   Development activities would occur, guided by the instructional needs of the students. Options
   include: before the school day begins, after the school day ends, or on weekends. If the School
   Oversight Committees recommendation on any of these matters is rejected or modified, the
   principal and the Executive Director shall jointly provide the reasons, in writing, to the School
   Oversight Committee.
2. At the end of each semester, each School Oversight Committee must provide a report to the
   principal and to the Executive Director stating when and how each Professional Development
   activity was implemented.

ARTICLE XX
Severability

20.1 Conformity to Law
If any provisions of this Agreement or any application thereof to any teacher or group of teachers
is held to be contrary to law by a court of competent jurisdiction, or the Maryland State Board of
Education, such provision or application will not be deemed valid and subsisting, except to the
extent permitted by law, but all other provisions or applications will continue in full force and
effect.

20.2 Conflict with State, Federal Grant-in-Aid Funds
Should any provision of this Agreement jeopardize the receipt by the Board of any State or Federal
grant-in-aid funds or other State or Federal allotments of money, the provision shall be deemed
invalid. In this case, “jeopardize” shall mean a judgment made by the appropriate agency that a
particular course of action could delay, interrupt, curtail or eliminate funding of a particular
program.

ARTICLE XXI

No Strikes

21.1 No Strikes
A. An employee organization may not call or direct a strike.
B. Any employee organization designated as an exclusive representative that violates any
    provision of this Article shall have its designation as exclusive representative revoked by the
    public school employer and the employee organization and any other employee organization
    that violates any provision of this section is ineligible to be designated as exclusive
    representative for a period of two (2) years after the violation.
C. If an employee organization violates any provision of this section, the public school employer
    shall stop making payroll deductions for dues of the organization for one (1) year after the
    violation.

ARTICLE XXII

Personnel File

                                                67
22.1 Personnel File
A. There shall be only one (1) official file for each teacher maintained by the Board.
B. A teacher, upon proper identification to the staff of the Office of Human Capital, shall be
    permitted to examine his file. The teacher shall indicate in writing, to be placed in the file, that
    he has examined the file.
C. No material relative to a teacher’s conduct, service, character or personality, will be placed in
    the file unless the teacher has had an opportunity to review such material by affixing his
    signature to the copy to be filed, with the express understanding that such signature in no way
    indicates agreement with the contents thereof. The teacher will also have the right to submit a
    written answer to such material and said answer shall be attached to the file copy.
D. The employee shall be permitted convenience in reproducing, on the Board’s premises, any
    material in his file.
E. Administrators shall be encouraged to place in the employee’s file information of a positive
    nature indicating special competencies, achievements, performances or contributions of an
    academic, professional or civic nature. Any such material received from outside, competent
    responsible sources shall also be included in the employee’s file.

ARTICLE XXIII

Non-Discrimination

23.1 Non-Discrimination
The provisions of this Agreement shall be applied equally to all employees in the bargaining unit,
without discrimination as to age, sex, marital status, race, color, creed, national origin, disability,
sexual orientation, religion, pregnancy, gender, gender identity or expression, veteran status, union
activity or political affiliation. No person shall be retaliated against for exercising their rights
under this Agreement.

23.2 Personal Pronouns
In all instances in this Agreement in which the masculine form of the third person pronoun is used,
such pronoun shall refer to all employees.


ARTICLE XXIV
Labor-Management Committee

A. The Board and the Union agree that cooperation between the parties benefits the students, staff
   and administration of the Baltimore City Public School System. To this end, the Board and the
   Union agree to establish a Labor Management Committee. The Board and Union agree to meet
   at least six (6) times per fiscal year, to discuss matters of mutual concern. Issues of mutual
   concern will be considered and recommendations may be made by the Committee to the Board
   and the Union. An agenda shall be agreed to by both parties at least one (1) week prior to each
   meeting.

B. The Board representatives shall consist of the CEO or designee and such other full-time
   employees of the Baltimore City Public School System as they may from time to time invite
   not to exceed five (5) in number. The Union representatives shall consist of the President or
   designee and other full-time members of the bargaining unit covered by this Agreement,
   provided however that such representatives shall not exceed five (5) in number.


                                                  68
C. The date, place and hour of meetings shall be mutually agreed upon by the parties. Every effort
   shall be made to relieve the employee representatives for such time as is necessary to attend
   meetings without loss of pay or leave time. The President of the Union shall forward to the
   Labor Relations Associate at least five (5) days in advance of each meeting the names of the
   employee representatives.

D. The Labor-Management Committee shall oversee the work of joint committees established in
   this Agreement. Each joint committee shall submit minutes of its meetings and any
   recommendations from the joint committee to the Labor-Management Committee. The Labor-
   Management Committee shall forward such recommendations to the Board and the Union. The
   Labor-Management Committee may recommend to the Board and the Union the deletion or
   termination of any joint committee established by this Agreement.

E. The Labor-Management Committee may form subcommittees to address issues of mutual
   concern. One of these committees shall address a system wide approach to the mentoring of
   new teachers.

Article XXV
Conclusion

This Agreement, entered into by the Board in the exercise of its authority under the provisions of
Title 6, Section 6-408 of the Education Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended;
the Charter of Baltimore City and other regulating statutes, provides terms and conditions for the
joint relationship which will benefit the Board and the employees. This Agreement and each of
its provisions shall be effective as of July 1, 2021, and shall continue in force and effect until June
30, 2023, except that Sections 5.3 and 18.22 shall be subject to negotiations at the request of either



                                                --
party for the second year of this Agreement.

This Agreement is signed on this ____ day of             , 2021, in Baltimore, Maryland.

Baltimore City Board of School                         Baltimore Teachers Union
Commissioners                                          American Federation of Teachers Local 340,
                                                       AFL-CIO

Negotiations Team:                                     Negotiations Team:

__________________________                             _______________________________
James Whattam, Esq.                                    Diamonté Brown

__________________________                             ________________________________
Jennie Wu                                              Cristina Duncan Evans

__________________________                             ________________________________
Joshua Bailey                                          Natalia Bacchus

____________________________                           __________________________________
Mark E. King                                           Zachary Taylor

____________________________                           __________________________________
Erika Brockman                                         Corey Gaber
                                                  69
____________________________                      __________________________________
Jerome Jones                                      Fareeha Waheed

____________________________                      ___________________________________
Mary Ellen Quinn Johnson                          Kimberly Mooney


____________________________                      ___________________________________
Sheryl Atkins, Esq.                               Steve Mednick

____________________________                      ___________________________________
Nancy Gant                                        Brittany Johnstone

_____________________________                     ___________________________________
Anthony Felder                                    Franca Muller Paz

____________________________                      ___________________________________
John Merrill                                      Nathan Ferrell

                                                  ___________________________________
                                                  Maria Conway

                                                  ____________________________________
                                                  Patrice Pilgrim

                                                  ____________________________________
                                                  John Casey



Approved as to form and legal sufficiency:        Approved and noted by the Baltimore City
                                                  Board of School Commissioners:


_____________________________                     __________________________________
James Whattam, Esq.                               Johnette Richardson, Chair


                                                  Chief Executive Officer:


                                                  __________________________________
                                                  Sonja Brookins Santelises, Ed.D.




                                             70
                                  ADDENDUM I




  2021 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
            Effective July 1, 2021
                     BASE TEACHER
           Standard Professional     Model      Lead
Interval   BTU.200      BTU.201     BTU.202    BTU.203
   1         52,712        65,854     96,172   104,713
   2         54,294        68,727     97,863   106,516
   3         55,922        71,602     99,554   108,321
   4         57,600        74,475    101,245   110,123
   5         59,326        77,350    102,934   111,926
   6                       80,448
   7                       83,660
   8                       85,350
   9                       86,483
  10                       87,615
  11                       88,747
  12                       89,881
  13                       91,013
  14                       92,145
  15                       93,279




                                      71
     2021 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
               Effective July 1, 2021
                        SUPPORT TEACHER
              Standard        Professional          Model               *
 Interval      BTU.210           BTU.211           BTU.212
     1            55,154              68,902        100,624
     2            56,806              71,908        102,393
     3            58,511              74,916        104,162
     4            60,235              77,922        105,931
     5            62,073              80,930        107,700
     6                                84,173
     7                                87,533
     8                                89,300
     9                                90,486
    10                                91,671
    11                                92,855
    12                                94,041
    13                                95,227
    14                                96,411
    15                                97,597
*If hired for a Lead Teacher position, a teacher moves to the Lead Pathway of
the Base Teacher salary schedule and the interval with the next highest salary
from the salary of the teacher’s previous position.




                                                       72
     2021 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
               Effective July 1, 2021
                               CLINICIAN
              Standard Professional                 Model               *
 Interval      BTU.220           BTU.221           BTU.222
     1            55,130              68,272          98,589
     2            56,711              71,145        100,280
     3            58,340              74,019        101,971
     4            60,018              76,892        103,661
     5            61,745              79,767        105,351
     6                                82,866
     7                                86,077
     8                                87,767
     9                                88,900
    10                                90,033
    11                                91,164
    12                                92,298
    13                                93,431
    14                                94,563
    15                                95,695
*If hired for a Lead Teacher position, a teacher moves to the Lead Pathway of
the Base Teacher salary schedule and the interval with the next highest salary
from the salary of the teacher’s previous position.




                                                       73
     2021 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
               Effective July 1, 2021
                     DEPARTMENT HEAD IV
              Standard Professional                 Model               *
 Interval      BTU.230           BTU.231           BTU.232
     1            56,819              69,961        100,279
     2            58,400              72,834        101,970
     3            60,029              75,708        103,660
     4            61,707              78,581        105,351
     5            63,434              81,456        107,040
     6                                84,556
     7                                87,766
     8                                89,458
     9                                90,589
    10                                91,722
    11                                92,854
    12                                93,988
    13                                95,120
    14                                96,252
    15                                97,386
*If hired for a Lead Teacher position, a teacher moves to the Lead Pathway of
the Base Teacher salary schedule and the interval with the next highest salary
from the salary of the teacher’s previous position.




                                                       74
     2021 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
               Effective July 1, 2021
                     DEPARTMENT HEAD III
              Standard Professional                 Model               *
 Interval      BTU.240           BTU.241           BTU.242
     1            57,095              70,238        100,555
     2            58,676              73,110        102,246
     3            60,305              75,984        103,936
     4            61,983              78,857        105,627
     5            63,710              81,733        107,316
     6                                84,832
     7                                88,042
     8                                89,734
     9                                90,865
    10                                91,998
    11                                93,130
    12                                94,264
    13                                95,396
    14                                96,528
    15                                97,662
*If hired for a Lead Teacher position, a teacher moves to the Lead Pathway of
the Base Teacher salary schedule and the interval with the next highest salary
from the salary of the teacher’s previous position.




                                                       75
     2021 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
               Effective July 1, 2021
                     DEPARTMENT HEAD II
              Standard Professional                 Model               *
 Interval      BTU.250           BTU.251           BTU.252
     1            57,459              70,601        100,919
     2            59,040              73,475        102,610
     3            60,669              76,347        104,300
     4            62,347              79,221        105,990
     5            64,074              82,097        107,679
     6                                85,195
     7                                88,406
     8                                90,098
     9                                91,229
    10                                92,361
    11                                93,494
    12                                94,628
    13                                95,759
    14                                96,892
    15                                98,026
*If hired for a Lead Teacher position, a teacher moves to the Lead Pathway of
the Base Teacher salary schedule and the interval with the next highest salary
from the salary of the teacher’s previous position.




                                                       76
     2021 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
               Effective July 1, 2021
                      DEPARTMENT HEAD I
              Standard Professional                 Model               *
 Interval      BTU.260           BTU.261           BTU.262
     1            57,822              70,964        101,281
     2            59,403              73,838        102,972
     3            61,031              76,711        104,662
     4            62,710              79,584        106,354
     5            64,437              82,458        108,043
     6                                85,558
     7                                88,769
     8                                90,460
     9                                91,591
    10                                92,724
    11                                93,857
    12                                94,990
    13                                96,122
    14                                97,255
    15                                98,388
*If hired for a Lead Teacher position, a teacher moves to the Lead Pathway of
the Base Teacher salary schedule and the interval with the next highest salary
from the salary of the teacher’s previous position.




                                                       77
     2021 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
               Effective July 1, 2021
                CALENDAR YEAR ASSOCIATE
              Standard Professional                 Model               *
 Interval      BTU.270           BTU.271           BTU.272
     1            60,644              75,762        110,642
     2            62,464              79,068        112,587
     3            64,336              82,375        114,533
     4            66,267              85,680        116,477
     5            68,254              88,988        118,422
     6                                92,554
     7                                96,246
     8                                98,193
     9                                99,495
    10                              100,798
    11                              102,100
    12                              103,404
    13                              104,707
    14                              106,010
    15                              107,312
*If hired for a Lead Teacher position, a teacher moves to the Lead Pathway of
the Base Teacher salary schedule and the interval with the next highest salary
from the salary of the teacher’s previous position.




                                                       78
     2021 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
               Effective July 1, 2021
                      IEP TEAM ASSOCIATE
              Standard Professional                 Model               *
 Interval      BTU.280           BTU.281           BTU.282
     1            55,390              68,532          98,849
     2            56,971              71,405        100,541
     3            58,599              74,280        102,232
     4            60,279              77,153        103,923
     5            62,005              80,027        105,613
     6                                83,126
     7                                86,337
     8                                88,028
     9                                89,161
    10                                90,292
    11                                91,425
    12                                92,559
    13                                93,692
    14                                94,823
    15                                95,957
*If hired for a Lead Teacher position, a teacher moves to the Lead Pathway of
the Base Teacher salary schedule and the interval with the next highest salary
from the salary of the teacher’s previous position.




                                                       79
   2022 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
            Effective July 1, 2022
                      BASE TEACHER
           Standard Professional    Model      Lead
Interval   BTU.200      BTU.201     BTU.202   BTU.203
   1         53,898        67,336    98,336   107,069
   2         55,516        70,273   100,065   108,913
   3         57,180        73,213   101,794   110,758
   4         58,896        76,151   103,523   112,601
   5         60,661        79,090   105,250   114,444
   6                       82,258
   7                       85,542
   8                       87,270
   9                       88,429
  10                       89,586
  11                       90,744
  12                       91,903
  13                       93,061
  14                       94,218
  15                       95,378




                                      80
     2022 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
              Effective July 1, 2022
                        SUPPORT TEACHER
              Standard        Professional          Model               *
 Interval      BTU.210           BTU.211           BTU.212
     1            56,395              70,452        102,888
     2            58,084              73,526        104,697
     3            59,827              76,602        106,506
     4            61,590              79,675        108,314
     5            63,470              82,751        110,123
     6                                86,067
     7                                89,502
     8                                91,309
     9                                92,522
    10                                93,734
    11                                94,944
    12                                96,157
    13                                97,370
    14                                98,580
    15                                99,793
*If hired for a Lead Teacher position, a teacher moves to the Lead Pathway of
the Base Teacher salary schedule and the interval with the next highest salary
from the salary of the teacher’s previous position.




                                                       81
     2022 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
              Effective July 1, 2022
                               CLINICIAN
              Standard Professional                 Model               *
 Interval      BTU.220           BTU.221           BTU.222
     1            56,370              69,808        100,807
     2            57,987              72,746        102,536
     3            59,653              75,684        104,265
     4            61,368              78,622        105,993
     5            63,134              81,562        107,721
     6                                84,730
     7                                88,014
     8                                89,742
     9                                90,900
    10                                92,059
    11                                93,215
    12                                94,375
    13                                95,533
    14                                96,691
    15                                97,848
*If hired for a Lead Teacher position, a teacher moves to the Lead Pathway of
the Base Teacher salary schedule and the interval with the next highest salary
from the salary of the teacher’s previous position.




                                                       82
     2022 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
              Effective July 1, 2022
                     DEPARTMENT HEAD IV
              Standard Professional                 Model               *
 Interval      BTU.230           BTU.231           BTU.232
     1            58,097              71,535        102,535
     2            59,714              74,473        104,264
     3            61,380              77,411        105,992
     4            63,095              80,349        107,721
     5            64,861              83,289        109,448
     6                                86,459
     7                                89,741
     8                                91,471
     9                                92,627
    10                                93,786
    11                                94,943
    12                                96,103
    13                                97,260
    14                                98,418
    15                                99,577
*If hired for a Lead Teacher position, a teacher moves to the Lead Pathway of
the Base Teacher salary schedule and the interval with the next highest salary
from the salary of the teacher’s previous position.




                                                       83
     2022 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
              Effective July 1, 2022
                     DEPARTMENT HEAD III
              Standard Professional                 Model               *
 Interval      BTU.240           BTU.241           BTU.242
     1            58,380              71,818        102,817
     2            59,996              74,755        104,547
     3            61,662              77,694        106,275
     4            63,378              80,631        108,004
     5            65,143              83,572        109,731
     6                                86,741
     7                                90,023
     8                                91,753
     9                                92,909
    10                                94,068
    11                                95,225
    12                                96,385
    13                                97,542
    14                                98,700
    15                                99,859
*If hired for a Lead Teacher position, a teacher moves to the Lead Pathway of
the Base Teacher salary schedule and the interval with the next highest salary
from the salary of the teacher’s previous position.




                                                       84
     2022 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
              Effective July 1, 2022
                     DEPARTMENT HEAD II
              Standard Professional                 Model               *
 Interval      BTU.250           BTU.251           BTU.252
     1            58,752              72,190        103,190
     2            60,368              75,128        104,919
     3            62,034              78,065        106,647
     4            63,750              81,003        108,375
     5            65,516              83,944        110,102
     6                                87,112
     7                                90,395
     8                                92,125
     9                                93,282
    10                                94,439
    11                                95,598
    12                                96,757
    13                                97,914
    14                                99,072
    15                              100,232
*If hired for a Lead Teacher position, a teacher moves to the Lead Pathway of
the Base Teacher salary schedule and the interval with the next highest salary
from the salary of the teacher’s previous position.




                                                       85
     2022 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
              Effective July 1, 2022
                      DEPARTMENT HEAD I
              Standard Professional                 Model               *
 Interval      BTU.260           BTU.261           BTU.262
     1            59,123              72,561        103,560
     2            60,740              75,499        105,289
     3            62,404              78,437        107,017
     4            64,121              81,375        108,747
     5            65,887              84,313        110,474
     6                                87,483
     7                                90,766
     8                                92,495
     9                                93,652
    10                                94,810
    11                                95,969
    12                                97,127
    13                                98,285
    14                                99,443
    15                              100,602
*If hired for a Lead Teacher position, a teacher moves to the Lead Pathway of
the Base Teacher salary schedule and the interval with the next highest salary
from the salary of the teacher’s previous position.




                                                       86
     2022 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
              Effective July 1, 2022
                CALENDAR YEAR ASSOCIATE
              Standard Professional                 Model               *
 Interval      BTU.270           BTU.271           BTU.272
     1            62,008              77,467        113,131
     2            63,869              80,847        115,120
     3            65,784              84,228        117,110
     4            67,758              87,608        119,098
     5            69,790              90,990        121,086
     6                                94,636
     7                                98,412
     8                              100,402
     9                              101,734
    10                              103,066
    11                              104,397
    12                              105,731
    13                              107,063
    14                              108,395
    15                              109,727
*If hired for a Lead Teacher position, a teacher moves to the Lead Pathway of
the Base Teacher salary schedule and the interval with the next highest salary
from the salary of the teacher’s previous position.




                                                       87
     2022 BTU Career Pathway Salary Schedule
              Effective July 1, 2022
                      IEP TEAM ASSOCIATE
              Standard Professional                 Model               *
 Interval      BTU.280           BTU.281           BTU.282
     1            56,636              70,074        101,073
     2            58,253              73,012        102,803
     3            59,917              75,951        104,532
     4            61,635              78,889        106,261
     5            63,400              81,828        107,989
     6                                84,996
     7                                88,280
     8                                90,009
     9                                91,167
    10                                92,324
    11                                93,482
    12                                94,642
    13                                95,800
    14                                96,957
    15                                98,116
*If hired for a Lead Teacher position, a teacher moves to the Lead Pathway of
the Base Teacher salary schedule and the interval with the next highest salary
from the salary of the teacher’s previous position.




                                                       88
                                 Addendum II
                                          7/1/2020     7/1/2021     7/1/2022
Director of Athletics                 $      5,848 $      5,980 $      6,115
Co-Curricular Chairperson             $      3,531 $      3,610 $      3,691
Badminton                             $      3,541 $      3,621 $      3,702
Baseball (Varsity)                    $      4,024 $      4,115 $      4,208
Baseball (Jr. Varsity)                $      3,702 $      3,785 $      3,870
Cross Country (Varsity/Jr. Varsity)   $      3,864 $      3,951 $      4,040
Football (Varsity)                    $      5,293 $      5,412 $      5,534
Football (Varsity Asst.)              $      4,356 $      4,454 $      4,554
Football (Jr. Varsity)                $      4,024 $      4,115 $      4,208
Football (Jr. Varsity Asst.)          $      3,702 $      3,785 $      3,870
Gymnastics                            $      4,024 $      4,115 $      4,208
Lacrosse (Varsity)                    $      4,024 $      4,115 $      4,208
Lacrosse (Jr. Varsity)                $      3,702 $      3,785 $      3,870
Soccer (Varsity)                      $      4,024 $      4,115 $      4,208
Soccer (Jr. Varsity)                  $      3,702 $      3,785 $      3,870
Softball (Varsity)                    $      4,024 $      4,115 $      4,208
Softball (Jr. Varsity)                $      3,702 $      3,785 $      3,870
Swimming (Varsity)                    $      4,024 $      4,115 $      4,208
Swimming (Jr. Varsity)                $      3,702 $      3,785 $      3,870
Tennis                                $      3,541 $      3,621 $      3,702
Track (Varsity)                       $      4,024 $      4,115 $      4,208
Track (Jr. Varsity)                   $      3,702 $      3,785 $      3,870
Volleyball (Varsity)                  $      4,024 $      4,115 $      4,208
Volleyball (Jr. Varsity)              $      3,702 $      3,785 $      3,870
Wrestling (Varsity)                   $      4,024 $      4,115 $      4,208
Wrestling (Jr. Varsity)               $      3,702 $      3,785 $      3,870
Custodian of Equipment                $      4,024 $      4,115 $      4,208
Director of Modern Dance              $      3,541 $      3,621 $      3,702
Basketball (Varsity)                  $      4,506 $      4,607 $      4,711
Basketball (Jr. Varsity)              $      4,024 $      4,115 $      4,208




                                               89
Side Letter #1 between the Baltimore Teachers Union, American Federation of Teachers
Local 340, AFL-CIO and the Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners




The Board agrees that all teachers or other certificated employees in the unit represented by the
Union shall be presented with either a Regular Contract or a Provisional Contract. Any teacher or
other certificated employee who shall earn tenure shall receive a written or electronic
communication from the Board notifying tenure has been granted.




___________________________________                        ______________________________
Edmund J. O’Meally,     10/24/17                           Dr. Lorretta Johnson, 10/24/17

Chief Negotiator                                           Chief Negotiator
Baltimore City Board of School                             Baltimore Teachers Union, American
Commissioners                                              Federation of Teachers Local 340, AFL-CIO




                                               90
Side Letter #2 between the Baltimore Teachers Union, American Federation of Teachers
Local 340, AFL-CIO and the Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners




The Board agrees that the expedient resolution of grievances is in the best interests of all parties.
Accordingly, the Board and the Union shall collaborate on the training of staff on the Collective
Bargaining Agreement with a focus on timely grievance processing in accordance with the
Collective Bargaining Agreement.

No grievance that advances to the next step shall be remanded to a lower step.
The terms of this letter are not to be used as evidence in any arbitration for a grievance filed prior
to the date hereof.




___________________________________                           ______________________________
Edmund J. O’Meally,            10/24/17                       Dr. Lorretta Johnson, 10/24/17
Chief Negotiator                                              Chief Negotiator
Baltimore City Board of School                                Baltimore Teachers Union, American
Commissioners                                                 Federation of Teachers Local 340, AFL-CIO




                                                 91
Side Letter #3 between the Baltimore Teachers Union, American Federation of Teachers
Local 340, AFL-CIO and the Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners


SST/504

The Board acknowledges that the function of the SST/504 chair is vital and time must be dedicated
to the work in support of students. As outlined in the current budget guidance, in order for a Social
Worker to serve in the role of the SST/504 chair a school must provide funding to increase the
hours of the Social Worker above and beyond the time allocated by the district. The Board will
issue updated guidance within the Fair Student Funding process that denotes guidelines on the
approximate number of additional days of time that should be allocated based on school enrollment
in order for a Social Worker to serve in the role of SST/504 chair beginning in the FY18 budget
cycle.

Emergency Petition

The expertise brought by Social Workers when a student is experiencing trauma that necessitates
an emergency petition is documented and appreciated by the Board. The Board recognizes that
Social Workers may not always be the only representative that accompanies a student if such action
is necessary and will issue guidance to schools regarding appropriate supervision when these
circumstances arise.




___________________________________                           ______________________________
Edmund J. O’Meally,         10/24/17                          Dr. Lorretta Johnson,      10/24/17
Chief Negotiator                                              Chief Negotiator
Baltimore City Board of School                                Baltimore Teachers Union, American
Commissioners                                                 Federation of Teachers Local 340, AFL-CIO




                                                 92
