COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT

       2011-2012 school year


              Between



     The Broward Teachers Union

                And

 The School Board of Broward County,
               Florida




 August 16, 2011 — August 15, 2014
                    TABLE OF CONTENTS – BTU TEACHERS



Article One                  Preamble

Article Two                  Recognition

Article Three                Definitions

Article Four                 Professional Qualifications and Assignments

Article Five                 Conditions of Employment

Article Six                  General Employment Practices

Article Seven                Health and Safety

Article Eight                Curriculum and Instruction

Article Nine                 Department Chairpersons, Curriculum Councils and
                             Professional Development Council

Article Ten                  Employee Preparations, Conference and Planning

Article Eleven               Student Discipline

Article Twelve               Reduction in Paperwork

Article Thirteen             Academic Freedom

Article Fourteen             Political Activity

Article Fifteen              Accountability

Article Sixteen              Student Teaching Assignments

Article Seventeen            Faculty Councils

Article Eighteen             Due Process/Personnel Files/Evaluation

Article Nineteen             Professional Compensation

Article Twenty               Promotional and Supplemental Pay Openings

Article Twenty-one           Achievement Incentive Pay

Article Twenty-two           Insurance
                      TABLE OF CONTENTS – BTU TEACHERS



Article Twenty-three           Leaves

Article Twenty-four            Employee Assistance Program

Article Twenty-five            Reassignment and Transfer

Article Twenty-six             Reduction In Personnel

Article Twenty-seven           School Calendar

Article Twenty-eight           Emergency School Closing

Article Twenty-nine            Union Rights

Article Thirty                 Miscellaneous

Article Thirty-one             Management Rights and Responsibilities
                               of the School District

Article Thirty-two             No Strike

Article Thirty-three           ESOL

Article Thirty-four            Grievance Procedure

Article Thirty-five            Inclusion

Article Thirty-six             Term of Agreement

Appendix A                     Infield, Out of Field Degrees

Appendix B                     Grievance Form

Appendix C                     Transfer Form

Appendix D                     Student Discipline Referral Form

Appendix E                     Salary Schedule

Appendix F                     Supplemental Pay Schedule

Appendix G                     Retirement Task Force Committee

Appendix HG                    IPAS Evaluation Forms
              TABLE OF CONTENTS – BTU TEACHERS



Appendix IH            Steward Designation Formula

Appendix JI            Broward Teacher Corp Program

Appendix K             Employee Fringe Benefit Flexible Spending
                       Package

Appendix L             Teacher Career Ladder Memorandum of
                       Understanding

Appendix MJ            No Child Left Behind Act

Appendix N             Memorandum of Agreement – Back To School
                       Night (Pilot Program)

Appendix OK            Reconstitution Process

Appendix P             Retirement Achievement Program (RAP)

Appendix L             Memorandum of Agreement – Domestic Violence
                       Leave

Appendix M             Seclusion and Restraint of Children with
                       Disabilities
                              ARTICLE ONE
                               PREAMBLE


A.   This Agreement is entered into by and between the School Board of
     Broward County (hereinafter referred to as the Board) and the Broward
     Teachers Union (hereinafter referred to as the BTU) as the exclusive
     bargaining agent for members in the teacher's bargaining unit.

B.   This Agreement seeks to establish the processes whereby the goals of all
     bargaining unit members and the goals of the Board can be coordinated
     and whereby conflicts can be resolved fairly and expeditiously.

C.   The Board and the BTU through this agreement seek to promote a
     professional working environment for all employees. Every attempt will
     be made to ensure that our teachers are the finest in the nation.




                                    1-1
                               ARTICLE TWO
                               RECOGNITION


The School Board of Broward County, Florida hereinafter called the "Board"
recognizes the Broward Teachers Union, hereinafter called the "BTU" as the
exclusive bargaining agent for the bargaining unit of employees as certified by
the Public Employees Relations Commission in Case Number 612, to wit:

INCLUSIONS:       The following certificated or instructional employees of the
                  School Board of Broward County, Florida: CLASSROOM
                  TEACHERS, (including Full-Time Adult General and Adult
                  Vocational     Education    Teachers),   Librarians,   Media
                  Specialists (in school libraries), ITV Studio Teachers,
                  Occupational Specialists, Guidance Counselors, Visiting
                  Teachers      (Welfare     and     Attendance      Teachers),
                  Psychometrists, Resource Teachers, Teachers of Exceptional
                  Children,     Department      Chairperson,    Grade     Level
                  Chairpersons, Guidance Directors, Psychologists, Primary
                  Specialists, and Head Start Teachers.

EXCLUSIONS:       All Upper Level Central Administrative Personnel, including:
                  Superintendent, all Assistant and Area Superintendents;
                  Middle Level Area and Central Administrative Personnel
                  including:       Directors,   Consultants,    Coordinators,
                  Supervisors, Managers, Assistants, Department Heads,
                  Principals, Assistant Principals, Deans, Curriculum
                  Planners, Curriculum Specialists, Administrative Assistants,
                  Substitute Teachers, and all other employees who are either
                  hourly-paid, noncertified, or noninstructional who are not
                  included above."




                                     2-1
                              ARTICLE THREE
                               DEFINITIONS


The following terms and corresponding definitions shall be used throughout
this contract:

A.   Superintendent:      The Superintendent        or   the   Superintendent's
     designated representatives.

B.   Immediate Supervisor: The person in an administrative or supervisory
     position directly responsible for the supervision and direction of an
     employee and to whom the employee is directly responsible.         An
     immediate supervisor shall be a person who is not a member of the
     bargaining unit represented by BTU.

C.   District: The School Board of Broward County, Florida, and/or its duly
     authorized representatives or agents.

D.   Employee: Any employee in the bargaining unit as defined and certified
     by the Public Employees Relations Commission (PERC). The terms
     teacher, bargaining-unit member, and employee as used in this
     agreement shall have the same meaning.

E.   Seniority:    The longest uninterrupted service in a position in the
     bargaining unit represented by BTU.

     1.    Service shall not be deemed to be interrupted by any leave
           approved and granted pursuant to this Agreement. An annual
           contract teacher who receives a satisfactory evaluation who is non-
           renewed and subsequently rehired for the following school year,
           shall not have a break in service if he/she works one (1) day more
           than half of the following school year.

     2.    An employee who leaves the bargaining unit for one (1) year or less
           for any position in the district shall return to the bargaining unit
           with uninterrupted seniority.       An employee who leaves the
           bargaining unit in excess of one (1) year for any position in the
           district or who has been laid off retains earned seniority and upon
           return to the bargaining unit, shall resume the accumulation of
           bargaining unit seniority.

     3.    Seniority being equal between or among two (2) or more employees,
           the tiebreakers listed below shall be applied in the following order:




                                     3-1
           (a)   Longest total service in a bargaining unit position in the
                 district as defined in Article Two, Section A.

           (b)   Longest uninterrupted total service in any permanent
                 certificated or instructional position in the unit.

           (c)   Earliest date reflected by the recommended administrator's
                 signature on the recommendation for employment.

           (d)   Earliest date of application for employment in a certificated
                 or instructional position in the district.

F.   Contract: The term "continuing contract" may be used interchangeably
     with the term "professional service contract" throughout this Agreement.
     This definition shall not be interpreted to cause an employee to lose any
     rights under applicable laws pertaining to continuing contracts or
     professional service contracts.

G.   Bargaining Agent: This shall mean the BTU.

H.   BTU: This shall mean the Broward Teachers Union and/or its duly
     authorized representatives.

I.   Memorandum of Understanding (MOU): When situations arise to
     attend or modify contract language concerning terms and conditions of
     employment, the BTU has a right to enter into any Memorandum of
     Understanding (MOU).




                                    3-2
                         ARTICLE FOUR
          PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS AND ASSIGNMENTS


A.   Employees:       No new employee shall be employed who is not fully or
     provisionally certified in the grade level and/or subject area to which assigned,
     except when employees with such certification are unavailable or in
     emergencies. Employees in the district assigned to a grade level and/or subject
     area outside the scope of their teaching certificates shall constitute the source
     of availability.

     Vocational Education: To be qualified to teach vocational education, the
     verified work experience required for state certification must be in the area of
     specific subject to be taught. Vocational employees who qualify on the basis of
     non-academic preparation must have the six (6) years' verified work experience
     or equivalent as specified for certification in the specific occupational subject
     area of the teaching assignment.

B.   Teaching Assignments: No employee shall be assigned to teach in a grade
     level and/or subject area not within the scope of his/her teaching certificate,
     except where a position within his/her certification is unavailable or when
     mutually agreed to by the affected employee and principal, or when determined
     necessary by the principal. Employees assigned to positions outside the scope
     of their certificates shall be assigned as soon as possible to positions for which
     they hold certification.

C.   Tentative Assignments: Employees shall be tentatively assigned to the same
     subject area and/or grade level for the forthcoming semester that they held
     during the previous semester, unless notified two weeks in advance for the
     second semester, or two weeks prior to the conclusion of an employee’s work
     calendar of the school year for the first semester that the assignment has
     changed. Employees shall be notified in writing as soon as any change is made
     in such tentative assignment. The Board agrees to provide the BTU one copy of
     the "out-of-field" report annually as required by F.S. 1012.42.

D.   Involuntary Assignments: An employee involuntarily assigned for one year or
     less to a position outside the scope of the employee's certification shall not be
     required to obtain additional training related to the assigned position nor shall
     evaluation reflect the absence of such training.

E.   Professional Service Contracts: Teachers hired with valid continuing or
     professional service contract in the State of Florida will automatically have
     reinstatement of said status upon the successful completion of one year of
     employment with the SBBC. After such a teacher has successfully completed
     ninety-seven days of employment with the SBBC, the principal may petition
     Non-Instructional Staffing to have said status reinstated immediately.




                                        4-1
                            ARTICLE FIVE
                     CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT


A.   Teacher’s Primary Responsibility:           The Board and the BTU
     acknowledge that a teacher's primary responsibility is to teach and that
     all energies should be utilized to this end. Therefore, the Board agrees
     that every effort shall be made to relieve employees of all non-
     professional supervisory and clerical responsibilities such as, but not
     limited to, playground and other school ground supervision (excluding
     recess supervision for elementary level students), lunchroom supervision,
     hallway and restroom supervision, study hall and detention supervision,
     bus loading and unloading supervision, money collection or transmittal,
     and various and similar non-professional responsibilities. Such duties
     shall be assigned to non-bargaining unit employees.           Recess in
     elementary schools shall not be used to replace regularly scheduled
     physical education programs.

B.   Materials/Storage:     The Board shall provide each employee with
     materials required in the daily teaching responsibility, chalkboard space
     and a copy of the teacher's edition for all texts used. Lockable storage
     space shall be provided within budgetary limitations; however, the
     administration will pursue the use of lockable classroom space, teacher
     preparation/planning areas, and suitable alternatives.

C.   Teaching Stations: The Board further agrees to provide adequate
     teaching stations for all special service and special subject teachers,
     including, but not limited to, speech therapists, art teachers, music
     teachers, homebound teachers, reading teachers and counselors. Private
     office space will be provided psychologists and visiting teachers within
     the limits of available space. Adequate dictating machines shall be
     available for psychologists.

D.   Duty-Free Lunch:     All employees shall be entitled to a duty-free,
     uninterrupted lunch period of at least thirty (30) consecutive minutes.
     Employees shall not be required to deliver or pick up their students
     during this time.

E.   Length of Workday: The employees' workday shall be seven and one-
     half (7 1/2) consecutive hours, including the lunch period. Those
     teachers who teach 360 minutes shall have a workday of no longer than
     eight and one-half (8 1/2) hours. If a four (4) day work week is
     implemented during the summer months, this schedule may be
     compressed into that period. Said compression shall not result in the
     reduction of salary or benefits.



                                    5-1
F.   Employee Facilities: The district shall designate adequate facilities for
     employees' lounges, restrooms, preparation/planning in each current
     and new permanent school. To the extent possible, any such facilities
     that are reduced to accommodate class size reduction efforts shall be
     restored as a priority facility expansion when class size limits have been
     achieved. To the extent possible, such facilities shall be secluded from
     students.

G.   Telephones: Adequate private telephone facilities for the purpose of
     conducting school business shall be made available in each school for
     employee use. Employees may use school phones for personal, local
     calls, provided that there are no charges to the school associated with
     said phone calls. Long distance calls shall not be charged to school
     phones. A telephone extension shall be provided in the base office of
     each employee whose assignment requires the frequent use of the
     telephone, including but not limited to counselors and psychologists.

H.   Off-street Parking facilities shall be provided for employee use at each
     school.

I.   Conference Areas: Private areas for teacher-parent and/or student
     conference shall be provided in each school by the appropriate
     administrator.

     Conferences with parents are an effective tool to keep parents informed
     of their child’s academic progress and an integral component for
     monitoring student conduct and performance. Teachers may contact
     parents in person or by phone for such purpose.            Teachers may
     unilaterally conclude such conferences where the parent chooses to use
     such a time to criticize or attack the teacher rather than discuss the
     student’s progress. Under such circumstances, the teacher shall notify
     their administrator by the end of the subsequent work day. Such
     notification can be done via e-mail.        Upon employee request, an
     administrator shall be in attendance at parent conferences when there is
     a reasonable expectation of inappropriate behavior toward the teacher by
     the parent. When possible, the administrator/designee and teacher shall
     meet prior to the conference to develop a strategy to maximize conference
     effectiveness for all parties.

J.   Relief Period: Each elementary employee, including special subject
     teachers, shall have at least a ten (10) minute relief period in both the
     morning and afternoon each day in a manner to be determined by the
     employees and immediate supervisor in each school/center.              An
     employee with an assignment other than a regular classroom assignment



                                     5-2
     shall not be removed from that assignment to supervise the students of
     another employee for such relief periods unless such relief periods
     cannot otherwise be provided, in which case not more than one such
     assignment per day shall be given.

K.   Faculty Meetings: Principals shall have the authority to schedule
     necessary faculty meetings; however, such meetings shall be as brief and
     well planned as possible. Such meetings shall be used for purposes that
     cannot be accomplished effectively through other means.         Faculty
     meetings shall be scheduled in a manner that impacts teacher planning
     time to the least degree possible. If more than one faculty meeting is
     held in a month, the purpose of the meeting shall be announced to the
     faculty in advance.

L.   Teacher Planning Days:

     1.   Planning Days:      The school calendar shall contain ten (10)
          planning days throughout each school year. Four (4) of these days
          shall occur at the beginning of the school year. On all planning
          days, teachers shall have one (1) hour for lunch.

     2.   The Superintendent shall designate one of the four preplanning
          days with the intent of not scheduling any activities except teacher
          planning. If the need arises, the affected principal may schedule a
          staff meeting not to exceed one (1) hours in duration on this day.

     3.   Schools have flexibility on how to utilize up to their current
          allocation of twenty-seven (27) hours per year of the total time
          available for professional development, exclusive of time allocated
          for teacher planning and preparation. Professional development
          activities shall be scheduled on planning days and two additional
          early release days exclusive of the four (4) early release days
          specified in Section W below.

     4.   Professional development activities shall be defined as those
          activities focused on improving student achievement and include,
          but are not limited to, collegial conversation, curriculum
          discussions, teacher training, collaborative planning, department
          meetings focusing of student achievement, analysis of data for
          student improvement, etc.

     5.   A joint school committee comprised of an equal number of SAC
          Committee members appointed by the principal and the Faculty
          Council shall be established as the School Professional
          Development Team. Working collaboratively, they shall conduct an



                                    5-3
           evaluation of the effectiveness of the current professional
           development activities. They shall examine the utilization of the
           total time for professional development during the two (2)
           additional early release days (excluding the four (4) early release
           days devoted to grades) and the ten (10) planning days for the
           school year, exclusive of the time allocated for individual teacher
           planning and preparation.

     6.    After gathering input from the faculty, the teams shall develop
           customized activities for the staff development time allotted to the
           early release days (as stated above) and the ten (10) planning days.
           If the team is unable to agree upon the activities for the days, the
           Superintendent and the BTU President shall appoint an equal
           number of persons to serve on an intervention team to mediate the
           situation and assist the school in developing appropriate activities.
           A final appeal may be presented to the Superintendent and BTU
           President for disposition.     A copy of the activities and time
           allotment shall be provided to the BTU and Employee Relations.

     7.    If, after establishing the activities for the early release days and the
           planning days, the School Professional Development Team
           determines that additional professional development time is
           needed to achieve the goals of the SIP, then the school shall initiate
           a waiver vote for the additional use of up to a maximum of eight (8)
           additional hours or teacher planning time for professional
           development purposes. This waiver vote shall follow the waiver
           vote process contained in Article 15, but shall not be considered a
           schedule change vote. The waiver and vote results along with the
           plan for the use of such additional time shall be forwarded to the
           BTU and Employee Relations.

     8.    The Board recognizes teachers as professionals and shall provide
           the flexibility necessary for each department/grade level to plan
           and implement such activities.

M.   Use of Planning Days: Each school’s School Advisory Council (SAC),
     working with teachers appointed by the school’s Faculty Council, shall
     develop a plan on the use of planning days based upon the District
     Strategic Plan and their School Improvement Plan objectives. For
     purposes of this project, the Faculty Council at each school shall appoint
     the following number of teachers to work with the SAC teams:

     1.    Elementary Schools, Exceptional
           & Alternative Education Centers        =     3 teachers




                                      5-4
     2.    Middle Schools                       =     4 teachers
     3.    High Schools and
           Vocational Centers                   =     6 teachers

     Prior to development of the plan, faculty teams/ departments/grade
     levels will be given an opportunity to make recommendations on the use
     of planning days. The SAC and Faculty Council shall consider faculty
     recommendations, present the faculty with preliminary plans, and
     provide them an opportunity to react to the plans prior to their inclusion
     in the School Improvement Plan.

N.   Access to Buildings: When school is not in session, employees may
     have access to the building to voluntarily perform job related duties by
     arranging such access with the principal. Every reasonable effort will be
     made to provide access time convenient to the employee.

O.   Interruptions to Teaching:        Unauthorized personnel shall not be
     allowed to interrupt or otherwise disturb an employee during the
     performance of his/her professional responsibilities. Observations of an
     employee's class by persons other than school system personnel shall be
     allowed only after consent has been granted by the principal or his/her
     designee, notification to the employee, and proper security clearance has
     been granted. The visitation shall be scheduled no sooner than two (2)
     workdays after notification, except in extenuating circumstances as
     determined by the affected principal. Such observations shall be no
     longer than one (1) hour in length.          Upon request, a building
     administrator shall be present in the employee’s classroom during the
     entire observation period.

     District personnel visiting an employee’s class during a formal and pre-
     planned visit for purposes of observing either the employee or students in
     the employee’s classroom shall do so only after the employee has been
     notified by the principal. Each visit shall require the observer to provide
     feedback to the employee within a reasonable period of time.

     Employees should be able to perform their professional responsibilities
     free from unnecessary interruptions or disturbances. To the extent
     possible, maintenance, custodial and construction work will be done at a
     time or in a manner which will not result in interruptions or
     disturbances of the employee's professional responsibilities. The same
     shall apply to the use of intercommunication systems.

P.   Vending Machines:       Profits from vending machines in employee
     workrooms, lunchrooms or lounges shall be expended for legally
     permissible purposes as determined by the employees in the school and



                                     5-5
     the principal at the worksite through the faculty council. Vending
     machines dispensing lunch items are not included in this provision.

     If requested, teachers shall be informed of monies collected and/or
     profits that have been spent from vending machines in employee
     workrooms, lunchrooms or lounges. The principal shall have one vote as
     does each Faculty Council member.

Q.   Equipment:      The Board shall provide cleaning or laundering and
     maintaining of school-owned physical education and athletic uniforms,
     uniforms for musical groups, towels, equipment, etc. The Board further
     agrees to replace stolen, lost, irreparable damaged, or worn-out musical
     instruments, at least as included on the "basic equipment list" in effect
     during the applicable school year, to the degree the affected school's
     finances permit.

R.   Behavioral Objectives: The writing of behavioral objectives may be
     required to determine the broad goals and objectives of employees for
     their students' expected success; however, the writing of behavioral
     objectives as a part of their daily lesson plans will not be required.

S.   Lessons Plans: Annual contract teachers may be required to submit
     their lesson plans to the principal on a regular basis as determined by
     the principal.

     In recognition of the professionalism of Broward teachers, employees
     holding continuing contract or professional service contracts shall not be
     required to regularly submit lesson plans, however, any time the
     principal does request lesson plans, the teacher shall submit the plans.

     Any continuing contract/professional services contract teacher who is in
     the documentation phase of the Instructional Personnel Assessment
     System for reasons other than the normal five (5) year cycle may be
     required to present his/her lesson plan to the principal on a regular
     basis. When requested by the principal, the teacher shall submit the
     plans.

     The primary purpose of lesson plans is to guide instruction. The format
     for daily lesson plans should provide for ease of use by the teacher or
     substitute and should not be unreasonably complex. Documentation of
     the incorporation of Sunshine State Standards and teaching strategies
     required by law, board policy or regulation are part of daily lesson plans.




                                     5-6
     Daily lesson plans will not require the verbatim duplication of
     information clearly available by reference elsewhere (does not include
     computer disks).

T.   Starting Time: To the degree possible, the starting time for classes in
     elementary schools and other special schools serving elementary level
     students shall not be later than 8:15 a.m.

U.   Registration:   Schools shall schedule registration periods into the
     shortest time period possible to assure minimum interference in
     employee planning and preparation time.

V.   Early Release Time:

     1.   The District shall provide that students at each school shall be
          dismissed two (2) hours early on six (6) days during the school
          year. Any school may opt-out of providing early release time by a
          66 2/3 percent vote of bargaining unit members through the
          waiver methodology described in Article Fifteen, Section G, 2-4.

     2.   Four of these days shall be scheduled the day prior to the
          employee planning day at the conclusion of each grading period.
          These early release days shall be used by employees for end of
          quarter activities including but not limited to grading of exams,
          grade preparation, or other appropriate activities as determined by
          the employee. The District shall schedule the remaining early
          release days after consulting with the Broward Teachers Union.

     3.   The two remaining early release days shall be used in a manner
          consistent with the procedures below.         On these two days,
          principals may use up to one (1) hour of the two (2) hours of
          release time to conduct staff meetings or activities that are directly
          related to school improvement.

     4.   At all work locations, each department/grade level with the
          principal’s approval shall adopt an objective based on student data
          and aligned with the school improvement plan and the District
          Strategic Plan on which to focus its efforts during the school year.
          Each department/grade level shall then adopt early release day
          activities that address its established objective.       The Board
          recognizes teachers as professionals and shall provide the
          flexibility necessary for each department/grade level to plan and
          implement such activities.




                                    5-7
W.   New Teacher Orientation Program

     1.   The parties agree that on an annual basis, newly hired district
          teachers shall attend a Broward Teachers Union-Broward County
          School District Orientation Program. Therefore, they shall work
          197 days during their first year of employment and their salary
          shall be based on 196 days. The parties will co-sponsor this event.
          Events shall not be scheduled at schools or other locations for
          newly hired employees at the time this orientation program is in
          session.

     2.   The parties agree that two (2) orientation sessions will be
          conducted. New teachers must attend one (1) of the two (2) days.
          Notification of required attendance at the orientation and the
          tentative date(s) of the orientation shall be presented to the new
          teacher upon being hired. New teachers shall be notified of the
          scheduled date of the orientation as soon as it is established by the
          parties.

          a.    All new teachers employed as of the first day of the 196 day
                teacher calendar shall attend the first orientation day which
                will be conducted prior to the beginning of said work
                calendar. Exceptions to this requirement may be made by
                the Superintendent.

          b.    New teachers hired after the first day of said teacher
                calendar shall attend the second orientation day which shall
                be conducted on a Saturday or weeknight shortly after the
                completion of FTE count week. Said date will be mutually
                agreed to by the parties.

     3.   Program Design: The President of the Broward Teachers Union
          and the Superintendent shall each appoint two (2) persons to a
          Committee to design the program. Program design shall allow for
          BTU and district participation in an equitable manner. Upon
          completing its' work, the Committee shall make recommendations
          to both the President of the BTU and the Superintendent for final
          action.

     4.   Cost: The Board and the Broward Teachers Union agree to equally
          share the costs of this program. The Board and the BTU shall
          each pay for their invited guests other than teachers and for any
          special equipment required for their activities.




                                    5-8
X.   Employee Input: As provided by statute, within thirty (30) days after
     the start of each school year, employees shall be notified in writing of
     their right to provide input into their administrator’s annual performance
     assessments.

Y.   Stewards’ planning periods shall be scheduled at the end of the student
     day, where feasible.




                                     5-9
                           ARTICLE SIX
                  GENERAL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES


A.   Physical Examinations: All employees, upon initial employment, may
     be required to present evidence of physical ability to perform duties
     assigned and of being free from communicable diseases. Such evidence,
     if required, shall be obtained from a licensed physician of the employee's
     choice. The cost of such examination shall rest with the employee. The
     Board may require a subsequent physical or psychological examination
     by a physician, or clinical psychologist or psychiatrist, respectively,
     licensed in Florida, when in its judgment such an examination is
     relevant to teaching performance or employment status.

     1.    The affected employee's immediate supervisor shall submit a
           request for the examination to the applicable employee and/or
           department as determined by the Superintendent. If the affected
           employee requests, he/she shall be provided a copy of the note
           written by the supervisor which indicates the apparent difficulties
           the employee is encountering.

     2.    The employee has the right to attach a rebuttal statement and to
           have a pre-examination meeting with the Superintendent's
           designee to discuss the perceived problems.        However, the
           employee must submit this request in writing to the applicable
           employee and/or department as determined by the Superintendent
           within five (5) calendar days of written notification that an
           examination will be or has been scheduled.

     3.    The employee may be represented by a person of their choice. This
           meeting shall not in any way infringe on the Superintendent's right
           to require an employee to take an examination called for in this
           section.

     4.    The appointment of the physicians and/or clinical psychologists or
           psychiatrist to the list shall be made by the local or county
           respective professional association and the Board shall pay costs
           incurred for the examination. Under unusual circumstances as
           determined by the Superintendent, an additional examination can
           be scheduled.

     5.    If a determination is made that no examination is necessary, the
           parties agree to petition the Department of Library & Information
           Services for permission to destroy all documents related to the
           incident.



                                     6-1
B.   Substitute Notification: Any employee shall not be required to obtain a
     substitute for himself/herself or for other absent employees.      The
     employee shall have the option of recommending a sub.              The
     recommendation shall be submitted with as much advance notification
     as possible.

     Where an employee has secured both a substitute and an authorized
     TDA, revocation of the TDA shall occur only as a last resort. Should
     revocation occur, the employee shall have the option of retaking the
     specific session missed the next available time the course is offered. The
     required TDA to attend the makeup session may not be revoked. If the
     workshop/training is offered only once, the TDA will not be revoked.

C.   Substitutes: Substitute employees shall be employed for all absent
     employees, except studio teachers, guidance counselors, psychometrists,
     guidance directors, psychologists, media specialists, and when the
     employee and principal agree that employment of a substitute would be
     inappropriate for certain exceptional children. When it is known that an
     employee in one of the exceptions listed above will be absent for an
     extended period, a substitute shall be employed for such absent
     employee. Substitutes may be employed during pre-school or post-
     school conference periods or on teacher workdays when students are not
     in session when the principal determines that the situation warrants it.
     Substitute teachers shall be expected to perform all duties normally
     performed by the regular employees.

D.   Covering Classes: Employees shall not be required to substitute for
     absent employees. Where substitutes cannot be obtained for an absent
     employee, temporary coverage will be worked out mutually by the
     principal and the affected employee. The principal shall establish a list
     of volunteers and shall rotate requests for coverage among those who
     volunteer. Where said lists have not been established, teachers shall not
     be subject to disciplinary action for refusal to cover classes. Employees
     who volunteer to increase their normal work load by covering the class of
     an absent employee when no substitute is available shall have their
     hourly rate increase by twenty-five ($25) dollars during the period spent
     covering a class (rounded to the nearest half hour). Employees who
     volunteer to increase their normal work load by accepting a portion of the
     students assigned to an absent employee in order to cover a class when
     no substitute is available shall have their daily rate increased by twenty-
     five ($25) dollars on those days when they accept a portion of the
     students assigned to an absent employee. Classes will be proportioned
     as equally as possible. In elementary schools where sufficient volunteers
     are available, classes shall be divided equally among at least four (4)
     employees. When volunteers substitute by covering other classes, they



                                     6-2
     are responsible to provide adequate planning for their own classes for the
     following school day.

E.   Full-Time Employees:        Substitute teachers, teacher aides, teacher
     assistants, or paraprofessionals shall not be employed in or assigned to a
     teaching position to avoid the employment of a full-time teacher when
     such a full-time position exists as defined in Article Twenty-Five, Section
     B, or for other purposes intended to circumvent any provision of this
     Agreement.

F.   Summer School Employment:

     1.    Each summer school center shall advertise all anticipated
           bargaining unit vacancies no later than sixty (60) days prior to the
           beginning date for such positions. The notice shall state the title of
           the position; where to apply for the position; deadline for
           submitting application; certification required; beginning and
           ending date of employment; the school where the application is to
           be sent; and the person with whom applications are to be
           submitted. Each applicant must apply for at least two (2) summer
           school locations.

     2.    All applicants shall be informed of the status of their applications
           no later than twenty (20) days prior to the beginning date of
           employment.

     3.    Summer School Qualifications: Assignments to such positions
           in each summer school center shall be made according to the
           following ranked criteria:

           (a)   Proper certification is held by the employee.

           (b)   Employee has taught one (1) school year in the subject
                 applied for within the past three (3) years.

           (c)   Applicant is a continuing employee of the district.

           (d)   Should the employee receive less than a satisfactory overall
                 end of the year performance evaluation ranking, that
                 employee shall not be eligible for summer employment.

           (e)   The School Board shall appoint eighty (80) percent of the
                 summer school teachers. The remaining twenty (20) percent
                 shall be selected based on seniority in the district.




                                     6-3
           (f)   Section (e) above notwithstanding, assignments to summer
                 school positions may be made in exceptional student
                 centers, Alternative Education Centers and of guidance
                 counselors,        instrumental        music         teachers,
                 agriculture/horticulture teachers and media specialists, in
                 which cases seniority within the center or classification shall
                 apply.

     4.    Steward Superseniority: One (1) union steward from each site as
           determined by the BTU shall be given superseniority. Assignment
           of union stewards to summer school positions shall be in addition
           to the twenty (20) percent of the positions currently reserved for
           teachers assigned by seniority. Should summer school not be
           offered at a steward's home school, the district shall place the
           steward in a summer school job at another location.

           Not later than March 1st of each school year, the BTU shall provide
           the Superintendent with a list of the one (1) steward at each school
           that this section as well as Article Twenty-Five, Section D, 5
           applies to. If the steward at a school leaves this position for any
           reason, the BTU shall immediately notify the Superintendent and
           provide a replacement name.

G.   Supervisory Duties: An employee shall not be required to perform
     managerial/supervisory duties as an assistant to or a substitute for a
     principal or other supervisor. However, elementary principals may
     designate an employee, upon mutual agreement, as teacher-in-charge to
     act in emergencies when the principal is absent.

H.   Supervision of Employees: All employees such as, but not limited to,
     psychologists, visiting teachers, and speech therapists, whose
     assignments involve working in or with more than one (1) school shall be
     under the supervision and direction of and responsible to the appropriate
     district central office administrator or his/her designee.

I.   Job Descriptions shall be established by the Board for all bargaining
     unit positions, including supplementary pay positions. A copy of the job
     description shall be provided to the employee upon request.

     Employees assigned to bargaining unit positions where the job
     description, board policy, and/or contract requires:

           1.    a longer calendar,
           2.    additional compensation,
           3.    an accompanying supplement, or
           4.    additional and/or broader job responsibilities,


                                     6-4
     shall be reassigned out of such positions only by mutual agreement
     between the supervising administrator and the affected employee, for just
     cause, or except when such reassignment is necessary for the
     operational needs of the district.

J.   Equal Opportunity: The Board and the BTU are committed to assuring
     equal educational opportunity for all students, to recognizing the rights
     and dignity of all persons, and to implementing policies which provide
     equal opportunity and assure nondiscrimination in employment for all
     minorities and women. The Board recognizes that minorities and women
     deserve equal opportunity for employment or promotion and that it has
     an affirmative responsibility to advance these opportunities.

K.   Bullying/Harassment:        School Board employees should not be
     subjected to harassment, abusive language, upbraiding, insults or
     interference by a parent or other person in the performance of the
     employee's duties. A principal or assistant principal shall not be
     considered in violation of this section when providing input during a
     performance evaluation meeting with a teacher. Bullying/Harassment
     shall be defined as unwanted and repeated written, verbal, or physical
     behavior, including any threatening, insulting, or dehumanizing gesture,
     by an adult or student that is severe or pervasive enough to create an
     intimidating, hostile or offensive educational environment, cause
     discomfort or humiliation, or unreasonably interfere with the individual’s
     school performance or participation.

     School administrators should not express unnecessary complaints or
     criticisms concerning an employee in the presence of other employees,
     students, or parents. Employee complaints under this paragraph K shall
     not be subject to the provisions of Article Thirty-Four but shall first be
     directed to the appropriate Area Superintendent. If the employee is not
     satisfied with the disposition of the complaint, the complaint shall be
     submitted to the Deputy Superintendent, Chief of Staff. If the employee
     is not satisfied with the Deputy Superintendent, Chief of Staff’s decision,
     the complaint may be advanced to arbitration for the final and binding
     decision.

L.   Back to School Night: All bargaining unit members may be required
     annually to attend one (1) back-to-school night. With sufficient reasons,
     an employee may be released from attendance of this activity with prior
     approval of the principal. Such employee shall participate in a similar
     type activity within the school year as mutually agreed upon by the
     employee and the principal.




                                     6-5
     High schools on a 4x4 block schedule may plan a second back-to-school
     night. Employees who volunteer to attend shall be compensation for
     three (3) hours at their hourly rate.

     Should the employee and principal fail to reach agreement by January
     31st, the matter shall proceed to the Area Superintendent for final
     determination. The Area Superintendent's decision is exempt from all
     provisions of Article Thirty-Four.

M.   Secretarial Services and Clerical Support: Secretarial services shall be
     available to elementary Guidance Counselors, ESE Specialists and Media
     Specialists to perform routine clerical duties (i.e. typing and filing) during
     periods where workloads are high and to the extent possible as
     determined by the principal. When media specialists are assigned
     classes to instruct, their non-instructional workload shall be modified to
     accommodate these additional instructional responsibilities.

N.   Trade Organization Membership:             The vocational department
     chairperson shall offer input with his/her principal on school/individual
     membership to the employees trade organization in each vocational area.
     The principal shall make the final decision and the school shall assume
     all costs for membership fees.

O.   Electronic Grade Books: The electronic grade book will be used in lieu
     of the traditional paper grade book when functionally possible at the
     work location.

     The Teacher of Record will input a minimum of three (3) grades by the
     Interim Period. By the end of each quarter, the grade book will reflect a
     minimum of nine (9) grades. Recording grades in the areas of related
     arts and advanced placement subjects will vary.

     Standard operating procedures should be followed for incomplete make-
     up work.

P.   Sign Out Sheets: In recognition of their professionalism, employees
     shall not be required to sign out of their worksite unless leaving the
     location during work hours.




                                      6-6
                            ARTICLE SEVEN
                          HEALTH AND SAFETY


A.   Unsafe/Hazardous Conditions:

     1.   Potentially Unsafe/Unhealthy Conditions:            There shall be
          compliance with all applicable local, state and federal laws relating
          to health and safety of personnel.         Whenever an unsafe or
          unhealthy condition exists, the employee aware of the condition,
          shall report to the principal who shall attempt to correct the
          problem. If the principal cannot correct the problem within ten
          (10) workdays of the date he/she is made aware of said problem,
          he/she shall notify the affected Area Superintendent for the
          purpose of taking appropriate action to investigate and resolve the
          matter. This deadline may be extended by mutual agreement
          between the affected principal and building steward. Each site’s
          Faculty Council, or subcommittee thereof, may review
          health/safety/air quality issues and make recommendations
          addressing such issues to the site principal/administrator. If a
          majority of the Faculty Council at a site is not satisfied with the
          administrator’s response and the response of the Area Office, they
          may request that the Contract Administration Committee review
          the matters. The District shall provide the BTU with reports of
          unsafe or unhealthy conditions generated periodically or as a
          result of a complaint. The school locations will provide the BTU
          with monthly reports identifying work performed to correct
          deficiencies.

     2.   Immediately Hazardous, Dangerous, or Infectious Conditions:
          Employees are expected to use appropriate judgment in evaluating
          immediately hazardous or dangerous conditions, and notifying the
          appropriate administrator when they believe an area should not be
          occupied by students or employees.           Administrators shall
          immediately respond to the employee’s concerns regarding
          hazardous, dangerous, or infectious conditions. In order to ensure
          the safety of employees and students, the District shall follow the
          Center for Disease Control protocols when responding to infectious
          diseases.     When receiving a complaint regarding potentially
          hazardous, dangerous, or infectious situations, the administrator
          shall notify the area office. For the purpose of taking appropriate
          action to resolve the aforementioned types of situations, the
          administrator/designee shall contact the appropriate district
          department (i.e Risk Management, Safety or Physical Plant
          Operations, etc.) or local emergency response providers (local



                                    7-1
           police and fire departments). The administrator shall inform the
           notifying employee of the recommendation received and the action
           taken.

B.   Safety Equipment: The Board shall provide safety glasses, lab coats
     and/or shop aprons for all employees assigned to subject areas where
     the employee is subjected to more-than-to-be-expected grease, dirt,
     chemicals, art materials and similar agents.

     Affected employees may, through their department head, make input to
     their principal on the type and quality of clothing mentioned above. The
     principal shall make the final decision on the purchase of clothing.

C.   School Facilities: The Board agrees to maintain classrooms, other
     learning areas, and school facilities in a clean and working condition
     conducive to effective teaching and learning.

D.   Bomb Threats: In the event of a bomb threat, the worksite shall be
     evacuated until persons with appropriate expertise deem it to be safe.
     Employees shall not return to schools or other employment centers
     which have been evacuated due to bomb threats until clearance for such
     returns has been given by proper authorities. Employees shall not
     search for bombs.

E.   Examining Students:       Employees shall not be required to examine
     students physically for the presence of any contagious diseases.
     Employees are encouraged to notify the administration immediately if
     they suspect a student of having a communicable or contagious disease.

F.   Air Quality And Health/Safety Committee: The Broward Teachers
     Union shall appoint two (2) people to serve on the district's Air Quality
     Committee. These representatives may bring recommendations and
     notifications of issues involving Indoor Air Quality to the attention of the
     Facilities Task Force Committee for appropriate redress. Each site’s
     Faculty Council, or subcommittee thereof, may review health/safety/air
     quality issues and make recommendations addressing such issues to the
     site principal/ administrator. If a majority of the Faculty Council at a
     site is not satisfied with the principal’s/administrator’s response and the
     response of the Area Office as provided in Section A above, they may
     request that the Contract Administration Committee review the matters.

     The Contract Administration Committee may recommend new/modified
     contract language and/or school board policy addressing concerns
     related to health/safety issues affecting bargaining unit members.




                                      7-2
G.   Health/Safety Component: Each school's School Advisory Council
     (SAC) shall develop a health and safety component to be included in its
     School Improvement Plan.

H.   Labor/Management Meeting: Any other concerns, not specifically
     covered herein regarding health and/or safety factors shall be addressed
     through the county-level Contract Administration Committee meetings,
     Article Thirty, Section H.

I.   Medical Procedures: The district shall comply with all provisions of F.S.
     1006.062, Medical Procedures. Except in case of emergency, bargaining
     unit members shall not be assigned responsibility for administering
     medical procedures or dispensing medication to students.

J.   Tools for Schools Program: The district shall implement the Tools for
     Schools Program and comply with all components of the program in at
     least 20 additional schools each year starting with the 2005-2006 school
     year until all schools have implemented and comply with said
     components of the program. Both parties agree to educate employees,
     BTU stewards and school administrators on the methodologies and need
     to fully participate in completing surveys in order for the program to
     succeed. BTU will release a steward at each of the selected schools to
     participate in training.




                                    7-3
                           ARTICLE EIGHT
                     CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION


A.   Reference Materials: The Board agrees to continue to make available to
     employees the reference materials maintained by the district. Principals
     are encouraged to provide additional reference materials of high use in
     schools where feasible.

B.   Materials: The Board agrees to provide the following materials to the
     degree finances permit: educational computer software, appropriate
     texts, library reference facilities, maps, globes, laboratory equipment,
     current periodicals, standard tests and questionnaires. Adequate and
     appropriate testing materials, including one (1) complete test kit and an
     adequate supply of test forms for each test recommended by the current
     district procedures for identifying exceptional students, shall be provided
     for each psychologist. The administration and employees shall seek and
     use the textbooks and supplementary materials which reflect the role
     and the contribution of minority groups to the history and the scientific
     and social development of the United States and which do not reflect
     stereotyping of sex roles or otherwise reflect adversely upon persons
     because of their sex.

     Special subject teachers, who are asked to work with students before or
     after school, shall be provided with reasonable funds when requested by
     the teacher and approved by the administration for such programs.
     Except in case of emergency, expenditures in excess of the amounts
     approved by the principal shall not be reimbursed. An emergency shall
     be determined by the principal and such determination shall be made in
     a reasonable manner.

C.   Typing/Copying Equipment: The Board agrees to make available and
     accessible in each school: typing equipment, copying facilities, and
     computer equipment with internet access to aid employees in the
     preparation of instructional materials. Unreasonable restrictions shall
     not be placed on employees’ use of equipment.

D.   Media Center: The district will make every effort to continue to provide
     a media center staffed by a media specialist in each school to supplement
     and complement the required curriculum.

E.   Submission Of Grades: Employees in middle and high schools shall not
     be required to submit grades prior to the last day of any grading period.
     Elementary employees shall not be required to submit such reports prior
     to the next to last day of any grading period. Vocational center



                                     8-1
     employees shall submit student grades within three (3) working days
     prior to the end of any grading period. No employees shall collect
     postage or money for postage nor to otherwise prepare student report
     cards for mailing to students.

F.   Psychologists Information: Psychologists shall have the right to refuse
     data or requests, which they consider to be invalid to the diagnostic
     process based on district and State requirements.

G.   Changing Grades:        The employee shall maintain the right and
     responsibility to determine grades and other evaluations of students
     within the policies of the district and affected State Statutes. Any
     request to change a grade shall be made in writing to the employee and
     shall result in a conference with the employee, the principal, the Area
     Superintendent and a BTU representative.




                                   8-2
                           ARTICLE NINE
          DEPARTMENT CHAIRPERSONS, CURRICULUM COUNCILS
              AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL

A.   Selection of Department Chairpersons, Grade Level Chairpersons,
     and Team Leaders

     1.     Selection Process: The bargaining unit members in each school
            and center shall meet not later than May 1st of each school year to
            recommend the name of a qualified unit member who wish to serve
            as department/grade chairperson or team leader. Bargaining unit
            members may recommend the name of a non-qualified unit
            member if the members of the team/department/grade level who
            meet all supplementary job qualifications decline the position or if
            no team/department/grade level members meet the minimum job
            qualifications. The principal shall consider this input and will then
            submit his/her recommendation to the Superintendent.              The
            Board shall act on the Superintendent's recommendation no later
            than the last workday in August. The person selected shall be paid
            in accordance with the salary schedule for said position. (See
            Appendix F)

     2.     Filling A Vacancy During The School Year: If a vacancy occurs
            during the school term in a position described above or in case of a
            newly-created position, such vacancy shall be filled pursuant to
            the procedure described in Section A.1. above. The input from the
            bargaining unit members shall be obtained within five (5) workdays
            of the occurrence of the vacancy and the principal shall submit
            his/her recommendation to the Superintendent.                   The
            Superintendent shall submit his/her recommendation within five
            (5) workdays of receipt of the recommendation submitted by the
            principal.*  The Board shall act upon the Superintendent's
            recommendation at the first Board meeting following receipt and
            approval by the Personnel Office of the qualifications of the
            applicants.

     3.     Appeal Meeting With Principal:           Should employees of the
            team/department/grade level disagree with the principal's
            recommendation for the position, a meeting shall be arranged with
            the principal to discuss the specific reasons for his/her selection.
            If the principal is unable to resolve the complaint, the employee
            may present the complaint to the Area Superintendent for review.

            If the Area Superintendent is unable to resolve the complaint, the
            Superintendent of Schools and the President of the BTU will meet



                                      9-1
           periodically to jointly resolve the unresolved complaints. The
           resolution at this level is final and binding and shall not be further
           challenged under Article 34 of the contract.
           *See Article 19-F-2

     4.    Chairperson/ Team Leader Duties:        The responsibility of the
           department or grade level chairperson or team leader shall be as
           prescribed in the Board-adopted job descriptions which may
           include but not be limited to:

           (a)   serving on curriculum councils as set forth in these
                 procedures,

           (b)   implementing programs and curriculum adopted by the
                 Board,

           (c)   assisting and advising principals in all of the itemized
                 performance responsibilities which are designed to maintain
                 and improve employee performance, and where applicable,

           (d)   serving on the Professional Development Council as outlined
                 in the procedures of this Article when duly appointed by the
                 Board,

           (e)   Participate with principals and assistant principals in
                 performance assessment conferences for the purpose of
                 assisting unit members in understanding their strengths and
                 possible areas for improvement.          Provide coaching
                 opportunities and assist with curriculum development for
                 teachers assigned to their departments/teams.

           (f)   serve on professional development teams for teachers who
                 need professional performance assistance.

           (g)   monitor the implementation of school improvement plans.

B.   Release Time: Department/grade level chairpersons and team leaders
     will be provided release time to carry out duties contained in their
     supplemental job descriptions and responsibilities listed in number four
     (4) above. Elementary schools will provide one (1) day of release time per
     month (10 months) for up to seven (7) team leaders. Middle, high,
     exceptional centers and adult schools will provide one (1) day of release
     time per month (10 months) for up to eight (8) department/grade level
     chairpersons.




                                     9-2
     ESE support facilitators, autism coaches, and ESE teachers who have an
     entire class comprised of ESE students shall be provided at least two (2)
     days of release time. The ESE teachers at each work location shall
     schedule said days and use this time for the purpose of attending IEP
     meetings, writing IEP’s, completing individualized planning and other
     appropriate curricular activities for their students. The principal shall
     approve the scheduling of these days.

C.   Professional Development Network (PDN)
     1.    The Professional Development Network (PDN) serves as a liaison
           between the Education Program, Student Services, the Professional
           Development Division, classroom teachers and other stakeholders
           with concerns relating to student achievement and professional
           development.

           Through collaboration, communication and support, PDN
           members assist with the development of activities designed to
           increase the skills and abilities of all educators and members of
           the school community to facilitate and enhance student
           achievement.      In addition, the Network assists with the
           implementation of the Broward Standards through appropriate
           professional development activities.

           A professional Development Network, hereinafter called the
           “Network” shall be established, and members shall be appointed
           annually by August, by the Board as follows:

           a.   The Network Committee shall have two (2) bargaining unit
                representatives elected by their peers from the elementary
                curriculum councils from the north, north central, south and
                south central areas (8) and

           b.   One (1) representative will be elected by their peers from
                subject area councils in each of the following areas:

                1   Language Arts/Reading                  Middle
                1   Science                                Middle
                1   Mathematics                            Middle
                1   Social Studies                         Middle
                1   Multi-Discipline                       Middle
                1   Science                                High
                1   Social Studies                         High
                1   Mathematics                            High
                1   English or Language Arts               High
                1   Multi-Discipline                       High
                1   Adult/Community School                 At-Large


                                    9-3
     1   ESE-Centered Based                      At-Large
     1   ESE School Based                        At-Large
     1   Social Worker/Attendance                At-Large
     1   Psychologist                            At-Large
     1   Guidance Representative                 At-Large
     1   VACE Representative                     At-Large
     (Vocational Adult Community Education)
     1   Non-Instructional                       At-Large
     2   Representatives Selected by the BTU     At-Large
     2   Parents                                 At-Large

c.   The Superintendent or designee shall be included as part of
     the PDN. The Superintendent shall select other members for
     PDN as appropriate to align the Network with Florida State
     Statutes.

d.   One (1) representative from each collaborating State University
     up to a maximum of two (2) from universities to be appointed
     by the Dean(s) of the College(s) of Education, and one (1)
     representative from Broward Community College.

e.   The School Board shall reserve the right to request additional
     nominees from any of the above upon official notice. The
     Chairperson shall be elected by and from the Network
     membership.        The Director of the Human Resource
     Development Division or designee shall serve as executive
     officer to the Network.

f.   The Network shall not exceed thirty (30) bargaining-unit
     members. All questions pertaining to representation shall be
     resolved by a majority vote of the Network.

g.   The PDN Executive Board shall consist of eight (8) members
     recommended by the Superintendent. The BTU shall appoint
     one (1) representative to the Executive Board. The Executive
     Board meetings shall be scheduled monthly.

h.   The Directors of Elementary and Secondary Education or
     designee shall attend Executive Board meetings.

i.   The PDN committee bargaining unit members who conduct
     activities such as but not limited to, training programs,
     provide coaching assistance, coordinate curriculum council
     functions or offer assistance in planning and/or the
     implementation of professional development events shall be



                          9-4
          compensated for their efforts beyond the normal workday at
          their hourly rate.

2.   Reports:    The PDN shall present their respective reports and
     recommendations to the Board through the Superintendent and
     Council Chairpersons.

3.   Sub-Committees-Curriculum Councils:         Curriculum councils
     shall function as sub-committees of the Professional Development
     Network (PDN). All members of the PDN will serve on at least one
     curriculum council committee. PDN members not associated with
     a designated content subject area may select the curriculum
     council committee on which they will serve.

     a.   Curriculum councils shall be established under the direction
          of the Division of Instruction and shall be comprised of the
          department or grade level chairperson, team leader or other
          representative.

     b.   The    council    shall   be   responsible    for    developing
          recommendations concerning the evaluation, planning,
          development, implementation and articulation of the
          respective subject areas and/or grade level curricula.

     c.   The County Curriculum Council sub-committees shall elect a
          chairperson from among its members.

     d.   Meetings of the Council shall be held as required to fulfill their
          duties and responsibilities.

     e.   The Council’s sub-committee shall present their respective
          reports and recommendations to the Board through the
          Council Chairpersons, the Division of Instruction, and the
          Superintendent.

     f.   District    level    subject   area    and/or    grade  level
          administrators/supervisors shall serve in advisory capacities
          to their respective curriculum council committees.

     g.   The Directors of Elementary Education and Secondary
          Education shall serve in advisory capacities to the respective
          curriculum council committees and shall meet with the
          curriculum committees in their regularly scheduled monthly
          meetings.




                                9-5
4.   The PDN shall perform the duties and responsibilities as provided
     by Florida Statutes and shall make recommendations for an
     appropriate budget.

5.   All names submitted must meet the criteria contained in the Board
     approved job descriptions.

6.   The PDN Committee shall select one of its members to serve on the
     Superintendent’s Ad Hoc Teachers Committee.




                             9-6
                       ARTICLE TEN
       EMPLOYEE PREPARATION, CONFERENCE AND PLANNING


A.   Elementary Preparation/Conference Time:             Elementary school
     employees shall have a preparation conference time totaling not less than
     sixty (60) minutes per day, excluding relief periods.       Additionally,
     elementary employees will use the time during which all their students
     are in special classes such as art, music, or physical education as a
     preparation/conference period and/or relief period.

B.   Secondary: High school and Middle School Employees shall be given
     one (1) uninterrupted preparation/conference period per day of the same
     length as the regular class period. Every effort shall be made to provide
     no more than three (3) different course preparations per day.

C.   Block Schedule: Middle school and high school employees on a block
     schedule shall have a preparation conference time totaling not less than
     ninety (90) minutes per day, excluding relief periods.

D.   Optimal Time Usage: Schedules in elementary and secondary schools
     shall be arranged to provide teachers with preparation/ conference time
     in the largest units of uninterrupted time possible. If uninterrupted
     preparation/conference time of the duration required by sections A
     through C above are not possible, teachers shall be allowed with the
     agreement of the principal to flex their starting and/or ending times to
     provide a preparation/conference time in the greatest amount of
     uninterrupted time possible.

E.   Change of Teaching Stations: Regular classroom employees in middle
     and high schools shall not be required to change subject area teaching
     stations more than two (2) times during the school day to the extent
     possible.

F.   Special Subject Teachers: Teachers of art, music, physical education,
     laboratory sciences, media specialists, speech therapists, reading
     consultants, visiting teachers, counselors, all special education
     employees, cooperative education teachers and occupational specialists
     shall be provided preparation time to the same extent as other employees
     in the district and the time shall be used for that purpose. Elementary
     schools shall make every effort to provide special subject teachers with a
     fair and equitable work schedule. Schools shall not regularly assign
     guidance counselors to teach classes unless at least one full-time
     counselor without teaching responsibilities is available to maintain the
     counseling program. Every effort shall be made to assign each special



                                    10-1
     subject teacher to his/her own classroom when assigned to instruct
     students on a regular schedule. When such assignments is not possible,
     a reasonable period of time shall be allowed for a teacher to move
     between classes.

G.   Alternative Teaching Assignments:      Should the District choose to
     implement combination classes and/or team teaching models, it shall:

     1.   First solicit volunteers to teach such classes through written
          notification at each affected worksite. Employees desiring to teach
          such classes shall file a written statement with his/her school
          principal of such desire. Voluntary requests shall receive first
          consideration.

     2.   Involuntary assignments shall be made at the discretion of the
          principal provided the authority is exercised in a professional and
          fair manner, not arbitrary or capricious. The principal shall advise
          the employee through a personal interview that the assignment is
          being recommended and the reasons therefore.




                                   10-2
                            ARTICLE ELEVEN
                          STUDENT DISCIPLINE


A.   Student discipline is based on the requirement that all students must
     adhere to a code of behavior and to conform with all school rules and
     regulations.

B.   District Discipline Committee: The Student Conduct and Discipline
     Code adopted by the Board shall be reviewed once during the term of this
     contract by a committee appointed by the Superintendent. However, by
     mutual agreement between the parties, the Code can be reviewed and
     amended at any time. The Committee shall be comprised of the following
     individual/groups:

     1.   Employees, including four (4) elementary, four (4) middle, four (4)
          high, one (1) exceptional child, two (2) vocational, (one from a high
          school and one from a vocational center), one (1) guidance, one (1)
          psychologist, and one (1) social worker.         Nine (9) of these
          employees shall be as recommended by the BTU.

     2.   Four (4) parents or guardians, one (1) from each area of the
          district, selected by parents and guardians in a manner to be
          determined by the Superintendent.

     3.   One (1) elementary, one (1) middle and one (1) high school, and
          one (1) center principal to be selected by their respective
          associations.

     4.   Three (3) students selected by students in a manner to be
          determined by the Superintendent.

     5.   The Superintendent or his/her designee and two (2) other
          designees of the Superintendent.

     6.   The Chairperson shall be elected by and from the Committee
          members. The Committee's request for any necessary assistance
          and other resources needed to complete its function, may be
          submitted to the Superintendent. Such annual review of the Code
          shall be completed by May 1st of each year and any revisions of
          the Code recommended by the Committee shall be acted upon by
          the Board by July 1st of each year. Upon adoption, copies of the
          Code shall be distributed to all employees and students.




                                   11-1
     7.    The district shall update the Student Conduct & Discipline Code to
           reflect full compliance with F.S. 1006.09, (1) (C) which addresses
           students found to have intentionally made false accusations that
           jeopardize the professional reputation, employment or professional
           certification of a teacher.

C.   Support and Assistance To Employees:                The Board has the
     responsibility to give all reasonable support and assistance to employees
     with respect to the maintenance of control and discipline in the
     classroom and shall provide necessary services for the diagnosis and
     evaluation of exceptional students, including dispersal of medication,
     and for processing certificates of exemption from school attendance.

     The principal, or in his/her absence, the person designated to be in
     charge of the school, shall have the responsibility for maintaining overall
     discipline within the school setting. Further, the principal shall delegate
     to the employee such responsibility for control and direction of the
     students as he/she considers desirable or as required by district policy
     and rules. When and where such responsibility, including dispersal of
     medication, has been delegated, the employees shall be supported in any
     reasonable action they may take.

     Each pupil enrolled in a school shall, during the time he/she is attending
     school and during the time he/she is on the school premises, be under
     the authority of the principal or person designated to be in charge of the
     school, and under the immediate control and direction of the employee or
     other member of the instructional staff to whom such responsibility and
     authority may be assigned by the principal.

D.   School Board Responsibility: The Board shall do everything within its
     legal power to protect and support the principal and employees in their
     disciplinary role. This shall include, but not be limited to, legal defense
     or reimbursement in accordance with Florida statutes for any civil or
     criminal action brought against any employee arising out of and in the
     scope of his/her employment unless such employee acted in bad faith or
     with malicious purposes or in a manner exhibiting wanton and willful
     disregard of human rights, safety, or property, and provided, however,
     that in any case where the employee pleads guilty or nolo contendere or
     is found guilty of such action, the employee shall reimburse the Board
     for the cost of any legal services for which the Board paid. The
     provisions of this section shall not apply to action of the Board against
     an employee. Each expenditure of funds for legal defense by the Board
     shall be acted upon at a public meeting with notice pursuant to Florida
     statutes. In addition, the Board shall assist the principal, employee
     and/or other school staff members in bringing about penalties for the



                                     11-2
     disruption of school functions or assault or battery upon the
     instructional staff as set forth under Florida Statute 1006.145 and
     784.081.

E.   Classroom Discipline: An employee may impose customary classroom
     discipline (except corporal punishment) where necessary in cases of
     minor infractions and may use such force as is necessary in protection
     from attack or to prevent injury to himself/herself or another person.
     The use of reasonable force necessary to isolate the disruptive student
     from the classroom shall not constitute corporal punishment as defined
     in accordance with Section C above, and shall not be used as a basis for
     the suspension of an employee nor for holding an employee liable for
     such an act unless the force used is degrading or unduly severe as to its
     nature. The Administration shall, within five(5) days, accurately code
     student discipline actions in the Discipline Management System.

F.   Student Discipline Plan:

     1.    Each school's School Advisory Council (SAC), working with
           teachers appointed by the school's Faculty Council, shall develop a
           comprehensive student discipline plan. The administration shall
           utilize the Administrative Discipline Matrix to ensure consistency
           of student discipline throughout the District, except when its use
           conflicts with a student discipline plan developed and adopted
           through a faculty vote following the process below. If a conflict
           between the Administrative Discipline Matrix and a school’s
           discipline plan arises, the parties shall form a joint intervention
           team of two members appointed by each party to meet with the
           school’s discipline committee to resolve any conflict and to ensure
           that the plan meets the intent of the matrix.

     2.    The Plan shall incorporate the principles of progressive discipline
           and provide for clear guidelines and consequences as well as
           encourage consistency in its school-wide application by teachers
           and administrators. Discipline procedures such as when and how
           a teacher should send a disruptive student to the administrative
           offices should also be addressed.        The plan shall include
           procedures for a teacher to exclude a student from class and for
           the subsequent development of a behavior contract. The contract
           shall be developed by the committee recommending placement
           with input from the student’s teacher and shall delineate what
           further disciplinary action may be recommended should the
           student violate the behavior contract. Said procedures shall be
           consistent with Florida Statutes and Board Policy. For the purpose




                                    11-3
     of this project, the Faculty Council at each school shall appoint the
     following number of teachers to work with the SAC teams:

     a. Elem. Schools, Exceptional & Alternative Educ. Ctrs.   =3 teachers
     b. Middle Schools                                         =4 teachers
     c. High Schools and Vocational Centers                    =6 teachers

3.   The plans will be developed and submitted as a component of the
     School Improvement Plan for implementation during the next
     school year.

4.   Faculty Vote: Once the above-cited group finalizes the plans, the
     plans shall be voted on by the bargaining unit members in affected
     schools and must be approved by 66 2/3 percent of said members
     in accordance with the provision contained in Article Fifteen,
     Section G, 2-4 of this Agreement.

     The Broward Teachers Union shall receive one (1) copy of each
     school's discipline plan.

     If the plan is not approved, then Section 4 below of this contract
     shall be implemented.

5.   If the faculty at a school cannot agree and approve a discipline
     plan, then the following provisions shall be implemented:

     a.    An employee may remove a student to the principal or
           his/her designee when the grossness of the offense, the
           persistence of the misbehavior or disruptive effect of the
           behavior makes the continued presence of the student in the
           classroom intolerable.

     b.    Prior to such student being readmitted to the classroom, the
           principal or his/her designee to whom the student has been
           removed shall provide in writing to the employee a statement
           of the specific action taken and the consequences to the
           student if the incident recurs. The teacher may exclude a
           student from the class in compliance with Florida Statutes
           and Board Policy.

     c.    The form shall contain a space where the teacher may
           recommend a consequence to the principal/ administrator
           for the offense.     The administration shall utilize the
           Administrative Discipline Matrix and provide an explanation
           at the request of the referring teacher when the



                                11-4
                 principal/designee     does   not    follow   the   teacher’s
                 recommendation.

           d.    The student referral form must contain a section indicating
                 the specific action taken by the Administration and the
                 consequences to the student if the incident recurs.

G.   District Standard Referral Form: There shall be one (1) student
     referral form used throughout the district (see Appendix D). When
     appropriate, teachers shall use this referral form to request
     administrative disciplinary action. Such administrative action shall be
     noted on the form and the referring teacher shall be provided a copy. A
     school may request a waiver of the district referral form consistent with
     the district waiver timeline and contract language concerning student
     discipline. Should a school be granted the waiver of the referral form, it
     is not necessary to renew the waiver each year unless the school decides
     to make a significant revision to the referral form. The referral form
     included in Appendix D may be modified with the agreement of both
     parties to achieve the goal of paperwork reduction while maintaining the
     requirements contained herein.

H.   Written Statement: When a student is referred for disciplinary action,
     the employee shall furnish the principal or designated representative, as
     promptly as teaching obligations will allow, with full particulars on the
     problem or incident in writing utilizing the student referral form. In
     cases where the student has been removed, the principal/designee shall
     furnish a written response on the referral form prior to returning the
     student to class. In cases where the student has not been removed from
     class, the principal/designee’s response shall be provided to the
     employee within two (2) workdays.

I.   Student Discipline File: Individual records will be maintained by the
     principal or his/her designee on student discipline and will be available
     to employees as an aid for determining disciplinary recommendations
     concerning particular students.

J.   Special Assistance:     Whenever it appears that a particular pupil
     requires the attention of special employees, the Board will take
     reasonable steps to assist the employee with respect to such pupils. The
     Board recognizes that the employee shall not be expected to assume the
     ongoing responsibility for psychotherapy. Additionally, the SIU shall
     provide schools with a copy of the Student Felony Arrest Information
     Transmittal for students who have been arrested for a felony crime, and
     the schools’ administration shall provide affected employees with a copy




                                      11-5
     of the form. Teachers shall keep this information confidential pursuant
     to the requirements of state law.

K.   Reporting Incidents:

     1.    Principals or other appropriate administrators shall be responsible
           for immediately reporting to the Superintendent, through the
           Special Investigative Unit, any person who (1) commits assault or
           battery upon any employee, and (2) any person, excluding a
           student, who upbraids, abuses or insults any employee during
           employment, on school property or at a school activity, and (3) any
           person who is not otherwise subject to the rules and regulations of
           the school who creates a disturbance on the property or grounds of
           any school, or who commits any act which interrupts the orderly
           conduct of a school or any activity thereof.

     2.    Reports of death, and other threats of a violent nature made
           against an employee shall immediately be reported to the school
           administrator who shall immediately notify SIU and the affected
           employee.    The employee shall be given the opportunity to
           immediately notify law enforcement officials, the union and other
           appropriate individuals if the employee so desires.

L.   Filing Charges: The Special Investigative Unit shall make an immediate
     investigation. The Superintendent or his/her designee shall assist the
     employee in filing charges against the individual committing such act or
     acts if the employee chooses to file charges.

M.   Procedures To Correct Misbehavior: School authorities will endeavor
     to achieve correction of student misbehavior through counseling,
     interviews and conferences, which when warranted, shall be extended to
     include the child's parents. Suspension, alternate school placement,
     and/or other appropriate action as determined by Board policy, may be
     imposed for serious or persistent infractions of normal good behavior.

N.   Reimbursement To Employees:           The Board shall reimburse an
     employee for the cost of reasonable and necessary medical, surgical, or
     hospital services incurred as the result of any injury sustained in the
     course of his/her employment, less any such cost paid by district
     insurance programs or Worker's Compensation.

O.   Field Trips: Students may be denied the privilege of participating in
     field trips, social and/or extra-curricular activities if said student(s) have
     been disruptive, violate the student code of conduct or fail to conform
     with school rules and regulations. The teacher shall make this initial



                                      11-6
     decision and inform the affected student and the principal/designee as to
     the reason for the denial of the privilege.

     If the teacher's principal overrules this decision, the employee may
     appeal, in writing, to his/her Area Superintendent within two (2) work
     days of the principal's decision. The Area Superintendent will meet with
     the affected teacher, a representative of their choice, and the principal.
     The Area Superintendent shall issue a final and binding decision, in
     writing, within two (2) work days of the meeting.              The Area
     Superintendent's decision is exempt from the provisions of Article Thirty-
     Four of this contract.

P.   Student Removal and Placement Review Committee: Within the first
     four (4) weeks of the school year, the principal shall inform the teachers
     in writing about the availability, the procedures, and the criteria for
     removing a student from class and the establishment of the Placement
     Review Committee. The Placement Review Committee shall be organized
     according to procedures in Florida Statute and Board Policy.

Q.   The Contract Administration Committee shall discuss strategies to
     improve student discipline and employee safety in county schools and
     may make recommendations to the Superintendent and the President of
     BTU for appropriate action.

Q.   Child Protected Services:      Any person who knows, or who has
     reasonable cause to suspect child abuse, shall report it to the Child
     Protective Services. Relaying the information to an administrator does
     not relieve a mandatory reporter from making contact with Child
     Protective Services (FSS39.2011).




                                    11-7
                             ARTICLE TWELVE
                         REDUCTION IN PAPERWORK


A.   Establishment:      The parties recognize the need to minimize the
     paperwork requirements for bargaining unit members. To help facilitate
     this objective, the parties agree to establish a district level Data
     Collection Review Committee.

B.   Purpose: The Committee shall study and recommend procedures to the
     Superintendent for eliminating, reducing, revising and consolidating
     employee paperwork requirements. This shall include, but not be limited
     to: initiating a reports/form management system to ascertain that
     duplications in the collection of data does not exist; ascertaining that
     reports/form are prepared in a logical and uncomplicated format;
     reducing the number and complexity of required reports particularly at
     the school level; recommend the appropriate personnel and/or
     automated systems to prepare those forms/reports deemed necessary
     with the intent, where possible, of relieving teachers of this
     responsibility.

C.   Composition: The President of the BTU shall appoint six (6) bargaining
     unit members and the Superintendent shall appoint five (5) people to the
     Committee. The members of the Committee shall select a chairperson.
     The chairperson, or a classroom teacher member elected by the
     committee if the chairperson is not a classroom teacher, shall service as
     the district representative in reporting to the School Board and State
     Board of Education regarding paperwork reduction.

     Term: Committee members shall serve for a two (2) year term of office
     and may be appointed for additional terms. If any member cannot fulfill
     their term, he/she will be replaced by the person who appointed them to
     finish out the affected term of office. Any Committee member may be
     replaced at any time by the person who appointed him/her.

D.   Responsibilities:

     1.    The Committee shall meet quarterly on mutually agreed upon
           times and places.

     2.    The Committee is authorized        to   create   subcommittees   to
           accomplish its tasks.




                                    12-1
     3.    Any Committee member who misses three (3) successive meetings
           shall be removed from the Committee and a replacement shall be
           designated by the individual who made the original appointment.

E.   The Committee shall issue its written recommendations              to   the
     Superintendent no later than the last week in May.

F.   The Superintendent's Form Control Report provided to the Department of
     Education will also be provided to the BTU.

G.   Faculty Council/Paperwork: The Faculty Council or a sub-committee
     of the Council shall review all forms and other paperwork created at their
     school and issue non-binding recommendation to the principal for
     eliminating, reducing, revising consolidating school generated
     paperwork. If the majority of the affected faculty is dissatisfied with the
     principal's response to said recommendations, the faculty may request
     the district level Paperwork Control Committee to review said
     recommendations. The Committee shall process this review pursuant to
     the provisions of this article.

H.   The Data Collection Review Committee may recommend new/modified
     contract language, addressing concerns related to the extensive amount
     of paperwork required of teachers. Such recommendations will be
     referred to the Contract Administration Committee.




                                     12-2
                            ARTICLE THIRTEEN
                           ACADEMIC FREEDOM


A.   Democratic Tradition: The parties agree, within the prescribed course
     of study of the Broward County public school system, to seek to educate
     young people in the democratic tradition, to foster a recognition of
     individual freedom and social responsibilities, to inspire meaningful
     awareness of and respect for the Constitution and laws of the State of
     Florida and the United States, and to instill appreciation of the values of
     individuality. It is recognized that these democratic values can best be
     transmitted in an atmosphere which is free from censorship and artificial
     restraints upon free inquiry and learning, and in which academic
     freedom for employee and students is encouraged.

B.   Individual Rights: Freedom of individual conscience, association and
     expression shall be encouraged and fair procedures developed to
     safeguard the legitimate interests of the schools and to exhibit by
     appropriate examples the basic objectives of a democratic society.

C.   Rights of Others: While the employee must be free to live according to
     his/her own conscience, so must his/her students and the public
     he/she serves. The employee may not infringe upon the freedom of
     students assembled involuntarily by application of attendance laws.
     Opinion and theory should be clearly stated and identified.




                                     13-1
                           ARTICLE FOURTEEN
                           POLITICAL ACTIVITY


A.   Political Action: All employees shall have the entire liberty of political
     action when not engaged in their employment, provided such action is
     within the laws of the United States of America and the State of Florida.

B.   Political Materials: Use of political material for instructional purposes
     in the classroom is permitted, but each employee must be accountable
     that the presentation is open-minded, fair, responsible, and respectful of
     the differing opinions of others. Use of political material for political
     purposes in the classroom is prohibited.

C.   Political Coercion: All employees shall be entirely free from political
     domination or coercion, or the pretended necessity of making political
     contributions of money, other things of value, or engaging in any political
     work or activity against their wishes under the assumption that failure to
     do so will in any way affect their status as employees of the school
     system.




                                     14-1
                             ARTICLE FIFTEEN
                             ACCOUNTABILITY


A.   School-site accountability is an ongoing process through which
     professionals working as a team have the opportunity for authentic
     participation in the school and greater responsibility for its process.
     Those most closely affected by decisions ought to be involved
     significantly in making those decisions on all issues. This is the spirit of
     Florida's Blueprint 2000/Accountability.

B.   Committee Involvement:
     If the Superintendent creates a district-wide Accountability Committee,
     the President of the BTU shall appoint one (1) member.

C.   Training:
     1.    Recognizing that professional development skills are vital, the
           Board agrees to provide inservice training to teachers to the extent
           funding permits. Training shall be designed to develop and
           enhance the operations of the SAC and be extended to involve the
           entire faculty through the various stages of change and school
           restructuring. The Board and the BTU shall work together in the
           development and implementation of quality training related to
           accountability.

     2.    School-based accountability funds allocated to the school may be
           used to support these training efforts.

D.   Reconciliation/Intervention Team:
     The parties agree to provide a reconciliation team to assist schools
     experiencing difficulties in making adequate progress in student
     achievement or who need assistance in group interactions or with other
     school conflicts. The Superintendent shall decide the composition of the
     team, and when a team will be assigned to assist a school. The president
     of the Broward Teachers Union may make a direct request to the
     Superintendent to send a team to a specific school. The president of the
     Broward Teachers Union shall appoint two (2) team members.

E.   Shared Governance:
     The parties shall develop a variety of shared governance models which
     schools may consider. Schools shall select a model that best suits their
     needs or the staff may develop an alternative model of governance with
     direct involvement by teachers, other staff and community
     representatives.   Staff approval and commitment to the model is
     essential. The selected model of governance will be specifically described
     in each school's improvement plan.


                                     15-1
F.   School Advisory Council (SAC)

     1.   The President of the Broward Teachers Union shall appoint one (1)
          teacher bargaining unit member from each school to serve on that
          school's SAC team. The appointment is for a full school year. If
          the selected employee must resign from the SAC, the President
          shall appoint a replacement. The Broward Teachers Union shall
          provide updated lists of their SAC representatives by September 1
          of each year with subsequent changes provided in writing. Also,
          pursuant to F. S. 1001.452, teachers at each school shall select
          the teacher representatives on SAC teams.

          The BTU president shall appoint one (1) steward/or designee to
          participate on the community interview/conversation committee as
          part of the process for the selection of the new principal from their
          school The committee’s recommendations shall be submitted to
          the Superintendent of Schools for his/her consideration.

     2.   The role of the SAC is to:
          (a)  initiate, develop, implement and evaluate the School
               Improvement Plan and other school site issues to
               professionalize   teaching    and    to    improve  student
               performance;
          (b)  request technical assistance and staff development;
          (c)  overseeing subcommittees as a result of action taken by the
               SAC;
          (d)  others as decided by each school site.

     3.   School Improvement Plan (SIP)
          Once the School Improvement Plan is developed by the SAC team it
          shall be presented to the faculty for final comments or suggested
          changes before the SAC takes a final vote on its plan.

          If the final approved SIP is substantially different from the one
          shared with the faculty before the SAC voted, the principal and
          building steward will brief the faculty on the changes.           For
          purposes of this section, the SAC members will determine if the
          plan is “substantially different.” A final copy shall be available for
          review in the school's media center.

          The District will provide a BTU steward signature line on the
          School Improvement Plan document. Said signature indicates that
          the steward has knowledge of the School Improvement Plan. The
          steward may choose not to sign but the signature or lack thereof
          will not stop the implementation of the Plan.


                                    15-2
     4.    School Improvement Funding
           The Board shall fully comply with F.S. 24.121 (5) (c) which
           addresses guidelines for the expenditure of lottery funds. If the
           Florida Legislature deletes/amends the statute that this section is
           based on, or the State appropriation ends, this section #4 shall be
           amended or deleted to reflect the action taken by the Florida
           Legislators.

G.   Waivers:
     1.   The waiver procedures for policies, State Board rules, Florida
          Statutes, Federal laws, collective bargaining agreements, etc., are
          contained in the district's Accountability Policy.

     2.    Time Frame: All waiver requests must be presented in writing to
           the faculty not less than three (3) work days before the official
           secret ballot vote is conducted. The parties agree that the faculty
           cannot vote on a waiver addressing the same issue more than once
           each semester.

           (a)   Any change in the elementary school calendar (in compliance
                 with State Statute) or a change in the schedule or calendar
                 (in compliance with State Statute) of a Middle School or High
                 School must be the subject of a vote in accordance with the
                 procedures set forth in this Article.

           (b)   A vote regarding the total school schedule may be taken only
                 one time per school year.

           (c)   Schools which are voting for the first time to move to a new
                 schedule must commit to a minimum of two years for such
                 schedule. Thereafter, such schools shall vote annually on
                 whether to continue that schedule.

           (d)   Schools shall first vote on their current alternative schedule.
                 Should the vote be unsuccessful, then a new/modified
                 version will be presented to the faculty for a vote.

           (e)   In the event of that a faculty does not agree by 66 2/3
                 percent to adopt the schedule, the school shall return to the
                 school’s previous schedule.

     3.    Secret Ballot Vote: The vote shall be conducted through a secret
           ballot conducted by a bargaining unit representative chosen by the
           entire faculty who shall be responsible for securing ballots during
           this time. The principal and a representative of the Broward


                                    15-3
     Teachers Union shall be official observers of the election and ballot
     counting. Waiver request must be approved by 66 2/3 percent of
     the bargaining unit members in the school and not just those in
     attendance at the voting meeting (Example i.e. a school with 100
     bargaining unit members must have 67 positive votes regardless of
     the number of bargaining unit members voting. (If the waiver does
     not affect the entire school, then a vote of 66 2/3 percent of the
     affected bargaining unit members is necessary.

4.   Notice of Election Day: The date for the written ballot will be
     announced not less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to election
     day and will be conducted at the school. Any bargaining unit
     member who will be on an approved leave of absence on the day of
     the official vote shall be provided the opportunity to vote prior to
     the scheduled official vote as long as the final waiver language is
     available for review by the affected employee. Absent employees
     who return to work not later than one (1) work day after the
     election may procure an absentee ballot at the school, fill it out at
     the school and turn it in to the person selected by the faculty to
     conduct the vote.

5.   Challenge to the Voting Procedure: If the Administration, the
     affected faculty or the Broward Teachers Union believe that
     improprieties have occurred with the election, the president of the
     Broward Teachers Union and the Superintendent’s designee shall
     meet and agree on a remedy.

6.   Community Endorsement and Steward Signature:             After the
     election is conducted, the waiver request must be reviewed and
     endorsed by the community at an advertised open meeting. The
     district will provide a BTU steward signature line on the waiver
     request form. Said signature indicates that the steward has
     knowledge of the waiver. The steward may choose not to sign but
     the signature or lack of a signature will not stop the waiver from
     continuing throughout the District review process.

7.   Recommendation of the Superintendent: Without such 2/3
     majority vote, a waiver shall still be submitted but will not have the
     recommendation of the Superintendent of Schools or the President
     of the Broward Teachers Union. All waivers must be cost neutral.
     Window periods for waiver submission will be consistent with the
     district's Accountability Policy.

8.   Waiver Assistance Panel: All waivers shall be reviewed by a
     Waiver Assistance Panel. The president of the Broward Teachers



                               15-4
           Union (designee) shall serve as a member of the Committee. The
           Committee shall have no veto power.

     9.    Impact Bargaining: If the Broward Teachers Union believes that a
           waiver request impacts the collective bargaining agreement, the
           President of the Broward Teachers Union may request impact
           bargaining pursuant to provisions contained in PERC case law.

     10.   Waiver Duration: Waivers will be for one (1) year duration and
           non-precedent setting.

           A school may request a waiver of the district referral form
           consistent with the district waiver timeline and contract language
           concerning student discipline. Should a school be granted the
           waiver of the referral form, it is not necessary to renew the waiver
           each year unless the school decides to make a significant revision
           to the referral form.

H.   Transition Team:
     The parties agree to create a transition team when a new principal is
     appointed at a school. The President of the Broward Teachers Union
     shall appoint one (1) member of the team. The Transition Team will
     assist in the transition of a new principal so that there is an easy and
     efficient change of leadership while the school continues to work toward
     its goal and objectives as specified in the School Improvement Plan.

I.   Funding:
     The Board will provide $80,000, which shall be used to further the goals
     of the district's Accountability Program. Specifically, the funds may be
     spent in such areas, but not limited to: training, release time for teachers
     working on accountability projects, guest speakers, etc. The BTU will
     keep a written record of expenditures charged to this fund and shall
     make this information available to the district.

J.   National Board for Professional Teaching Standards
     The Board shall offer professional incentives/assistance to employees
     working toward and/or attaining national certification including:

     1.    Upon completion of the portfolio process, candidates shall receive
           sixty (60) inservice credits. Candidates who complete the process
           and do not receive certificates shall receive sixty (60) inservice
           credits.

     2.    Upon request, arrangements may be made with the principal to
           provide one (1) day of release time for the candidates to complete



                                     15-5
     the portfolio. This time shall constitute temporary duty leave
     assignment consistent with applicable rules and policies.

3.   The district shall strive to provide technical assistance for use at
     home for the completion of the portfolio. Candidates will contact
     HRD to facilitate assistance with video equipment. Arrangements
     for the use of the referenced equipment shall be pursuant to board
     policy.

4.   Upon publication by the National Board of the guidelines and
     procedures for re-certification application, the committee will meet
     and confer to recommend appropriate incentives.

5.   Candidates who receive certification shall receive an additional
     sixty (60) inservice credits.

6.   Candidates who complete the process but do not qualify for
     certification, have the opportunity to bank their subject areas and
     retake the exam will be awarded sixty (60) inservice credits if they
     engage in the retake process.

7.   New teachers entering Broward County in 2004-2005 school year
     with NBPTS certification shall be awarded a one (1) time payment
     signing bonus of one thousand dollars and zero cents ($1,000.00)
     after verification by the district of their certification by January 15,
     2005 retroactive to the beginning of the 2004-2005 school year.

8.   Up to five (5) mentors who have exceeded ninety (90) hours of
     mentoring shall be eligible to attend the national conference and
     the district shall incur the expenses. Selection shall be made on a
     rotating basis based upon the date the teacher became nationally
     board certified. Should there be a tie, then selection shall be by
     seniority. In addition to the five mentors attending, the District
     shall incur the expenses for up to two (2) mentors making
     presentations at the conference.




                               15-6
                        ARTICLE SIXTEEN
                  STUDENT TEACHING ASSIGNMENTS


A.   Qualifications To Be A Supervising Teacher: Employees supervising
     student teachers shall be continuing contract employees or annual
     contract employees with three (3) or more years' experience except that
     where such employees are not available in a particular subject area or
     grade level. The principal may assign any employee who will voluntarily
     accept the assignment of supervising the student teacher.

B.   Number of Student Teachers: No employee shall accept and supervise
     more than one (1) full-time student teacher per semester.           Any
     remuneration paid the district for accepting such student teacher shall
     be paid in full to the employee. In cases where college credit tuition
     waivers are given instead of remuneration, the employee shall accept the
     college credit tuition waiver.

C.   Student Teacher As Substitute for Classroom Teacher: No student
     teacher shall be used as a substitute teacher nor shall any student
     teacher be placed in sole charge of a classroom until the college or
     university supervisor, the employee, and the principal have mutually
     agreed that such experience is desirable.




                                   16-1
                           ARTICLE SEVENTEEN
                            FACULTY COUNCILS


A.   Establishment: A council composed of bargaining unit members shall
     be established in each school. Bargaining unit members who are
     assigned to a work location other than a school may also form a council
     provided that at least three (3) members are assigned to the location.
     The Council may request and shall be granted a meeting with the
     affected principal at any time during the school year on a mutually
     agreeable date and time.

B.   Purpose: The purpose of the Council is to offer input from the faculty to
     the principal concerning any matters pertaining to the operation of the
     educational program of the school. However, pending grievances may
     not be discussed. Recommendations of the Council shall be given full
     consideration by the principal.

     School Budget: In order to provide appropriate input, the BTU steward
     shall be provided a complete copy of his/her school's budget.
     Recommendations of the Council shall be given full consideration by the
     principal.

C.   Composition of the Faculty Council shall be as follows: In addition to
     the designated BTU steward, one-half (1/2) of the Council shall be
     composed of members of the bargaining unit designated by the union
     and one-half (1/2) of the Council shall be composed of members of the
     faculty elected by the faculty. Faculty Councils shall be established
     within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this contract. The number
     of members shall be as follows:

     1.    Elem. Schools, Exceptional & Alternative Educ. Ctrs. = 5
     2.    Middle Schools = 7
     3.    High Schools and Vocational Centers = 11

     The composition of the Council may differ from the one listed above by
     mutual agreement between the principal and a majority of bargaining
     unit members at each school. Schools that choose a different method for
     selection and composition of the Council shall report their method to the
     Board's Department for Employee Relations, who shall in turn notify the
     BTU.

D.   Length of Office: The term of office for members of the Council shall be
     for one (1) school year.




                                    17-1
E.   Meetings:      Faculty Councils are authorized to meet as often as
     necessary for the purpose of considering recommendations to be
     presented to the principal. Upon notification by the BTU designated
     steward that an election is necessary, the principal shall, in a timely
     manner, call a faculty meeting for this purpose. The Council shall elect a
     chairperson.




                                    17-2
                     ARTICLE EIGHTEEN
      DUE PROCESS/PERSONNEL FILES/EMPLOYEE EVALUATION


A.   UNION REPRESENTATION:

     1.    Written Notification of Reasons for Conference: An employee
           shall be given two (2)three (3) work days notice of a scheduled
           conference with the principal or any other supervising
           administrator (designee) for the purpose of taking disciplinary
           action and a written statement of the reason(s) for the conference
           except in cases deemed to be an emergency. For example, if the
           principal schedules the conference for a Wednesday, the employee
           must be notified on a Monday.

     2.    Notice to the Employee by the Administrator: Any employee
           summoned to the office of a principal or any other supervising
           administrator (designee) for a conference for the purpose of taking
           disciplinary action or issuing a reprimand (this excludes informal
           warnings, criticisms, or suggestions for improvement) shall have
           the right to request BTU representation and shall be informed of
           this right. When a request for such representation is made, no
           action shall be taken with respect to the employee until such
           representative of the BTU is present. It is the employee's
           responsibility to have a BTU representative present within three (3)
           working days of such request.

     3.    During the Meeting: If during the course of a meeting that was
           not called for the purpose of issuing a reprimand, the necessity
           develops for issuing one, the principal shall notify the employee at
           that time that he/she is entitled to BTU representation. When BTU
           representation is requested and the employee is to be
           represented by the union, no action shall be taken with
           respect to the employee until such representative of the BTU
           is present. It is the employee's responsibility to have a
           representative present within three (3) working days of said
           request.

B.   EMPLOYEE RIGHTS:

     Assessment data is used to develop ratings which are recorded on the
     assessment form. The forms become part of the employee's personnel
     file. Data is used in decision-making for personnel selection, training,
     promotion, placement, and other matters consistent with School Board
     policy. The following procedures apply to special situations:



                                    18-1
1.   Discipline and Renewal:

     a.    Progressive Discipline: Any discipline of an employee shall
           be for just cause. The parties agree that the concept of just
           cause embodies the principles of progressive discipline
           appropriate under the circumstances.             Disciplinary
           procedures may include but are not limited to:
           verbal/written reprimand, suspension, demotion and
           termination. The decision of the district not to renew an
           annual contract employee shall not be subject to this
           section. In addition the parties agree that the principles of
           progressive discipline do not apply to employees who are
           placed in the 90-day process described in Florida Statutes
           1012.34.

     b.    Probationary Period: It is the intent of the parties to assure
           that an environment exists that encourages the success of
           employees on an initial annual contract. Prior to making a
           recommendation for termination of an employee during an
           initial probationary period, the Area Superintendent shall
           review the recommendation and shall have the option of
           offering the employee a transfer to another location, which
           may offer the employee a greater chance for success. The
           decision of the Area Superintendent shall be final and
           binding, and the decision shall not be subject to the
           grievance procedure in Article 34. Nothing in this subsection
           shall be deemed to waive the rights of an employee under
           local, state or federal law.

2.   Complaints on Employees: No action against an employee shall
     be taken on the basis of a complaint by a parent or student or
     other individual nor any notice of such action or complaint shall be
     included in the employee's personnel file, unless the matter is first
     reported to the employee in writing and the employee has had the
     opportunity to discuss the matter with his/her principal.

3.   Investigation of an Employee: No investigation of an employee,
     beyond preliminary inquiry, by the Special Investigative Unit may
     be undertaken without written notice to the employee, such notice
     to include a statement of the cause giving rise to the investigation.
     Any information relied upon by SIU to take or recommend
     disciplinary action against an employee shall be provided to the
     employee and/or the BTU upon request.




                              18-2
     4.   Recommendation for Dismissal:         Any recommendation for
          dismissal of an employee because of incompetent performance, as
          specified on the employee's assessment form, shall not be made
          prior to the conclusion of a time period as set forth in the
          assessment form for the purpose of correcting such deficiency or
          deficiencies.

     5.   Conferences:      Any conference or hearing with an employee
          regarding dismissal, non-renewal, suspension, demotion, or other
          discipline shall be conducted in a manner so as not to abrogate the
          employee's rights according to law and the provisions of this
          contract.

     6.   Refusal To Sign Documents:          An employees refusal to sign
          evaluation forms and any disciplinary action forms that may be
          required/generated under the provisions of this article, shall not
          constitute any grounds for insubordination or for other action
          against the employee, when such signature is for the purpose of
          acknowledging that the document has been read and does not
          necessarily indicate agreement with its content.

C.   REEMPLOYMENT OF FIRST AND SECOND YEAR ANNUAL CONTRACT
     EMPLOYEES:

     1.   Notice: All annual contract employees whose contracts are not
          being renewed shall receive written notice of same no later than
          one month prior to the last workday of the regular school year.
          Any such employee not given such notice two weeks prior to the
          last workday of the regular school year shall be reemployed for the
          following school year.

     2.   Reemployment: First and second annual contract teachers who
          receive an overall evaluation rating of satisfactory in the end of the
          year evaluation shall be provided an instructional position
          provided that a vacant position exists in the district for which they
          are certified.

     3.   Involuntary Transfer: It may be necessary to surplus an annual
          contract teacher who has been renewed under the provisions of
          this section to another school. The following procedures shall be
          utilized:

          a.    Surplussing shall occur in accordance with Article Twenty-
                Five, Section D of this agreement, Involuntary Transfers.




                                    18-3
          b.    The Division of Human Resources shall be responsible for
                placing employees who meet the provisions of this section.

          c.    If an instructional position is not available for which the
                affected employee is certified by the commencement of the
                subsequent school year, the Division of Human Resources
                shall place the affected employee on a waiting list until a
                position for which the teacher is certified becomes available.
                The employee shall not be on the district's payroll until a job
                becomes vacant.

          d.    If an annual contract teacher refuses a job offer, the Board is
                relieved of its obligation to employ said person.

          e.    If a position for which the affected person is certified is not
                available, the Board is not obligated to offer the affected
                teacher an alternative/dropout prevention position unless
                the Superintendent and affected employee agree to do so.

          f.    The placement of a surplussed continuing contract
                professional services contract employee shall always receive
                preference over the placement of a surplussed annual
                contract teacher.

D.   RECOMMENDATION FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES CONTRACT:

     1.   Assistance:    Consistent with this system, every effort shall be
          made by the district, through assessment and consultation, to
          assist annual contract employees so that during their third year of
          employment, they will have attained the desired level of
          competence that will result in a recommendation for professional
          services contract (PSC).

     2.   Satisfactory Evaluation: Annual contract employees who receive
          at least a satisfactory rating on their performance evaluations
          during each of their three probationary years of employment, shall
          be awarded a professional services contract (PSC) if they meet the
          requirements specified in Florida Statute 1012.33(3)(a) provided
          that a vacant position exists in the district for which they are
          certified.

     3.   Placement:       The Division of Human Resources, shall be
          responsible for placing employees who meet the provisions of this
          section. If an instructional position is not available for which the
          affected employee is certified by the commencement of the



                                   18-4
          subsequent school year, the Division of Human Resources shall
          place said employee's name on a list and will place the employees
          in the appropriate instructional positions as they become available.
          If an employee refuses a job offer, the Board is relieved of its
          obligation to employ said person. The parties agree that if a
          position for which the affected person is certified is not available,
          said employees will not be placed in an alternative education
          position unless the Superintendent and affected employee agree to
          do so.

E.   PERSONNEL FILE - ACCESS AND SECURITY

     1.   Number of Files: There shall be no more than two (2) personnel
          files maintained for each employee.         The official file will be
          maintained at the district personnel office. In the event two (2)
          such files are maintained, one (1) shall be kept in the principal's or
          director's office at the school or other location where the employee
          is then employed. Each document placed into the employee's file
          maintained in the principal's or director's office shall be duplicated
          and the original transmitted to the district Personnel Office for
          inclusion within the employee's file maintained at the district
          Personnel Office. When the employee transfers to another school
          within the district, the file will be transferred with the employee.
          When the employee leaves the district, the file maintained in the
          principal's or director's office may remain there for up to three (3)
          years or be destroyed if the principal leaves the school within the
          three (3) year period.

     2.   Entries Log: Each personnel file shall contain a form titled "Log
          of Entries" to include all of the following information regarding
          certificates, commendations, assessment documents, disciplinary
          matters and complaints placed in the files: (1) a brief description of
          the time; (2) the date shown on the item; (3) the date the item was
          first placed in the file; and (4) the identification of the source of the
          item.

     3.   Anonymous Items: No item from any anonymous source may be
          placed in the personnel file.      Any item(s) detrimental to an
          employee's employment status and which are without substance,
          no longer pertinent, or otherwise inappropriate may be removed
          from the employee's personnel file upon request by the employee to
          the Superintendent, provided that the Superintendent's refusal to
          do so may be subject to the grievance procedure.




                                     18-5
     4.   Investigative File: The file established by the district as a result
          of any investigation of an employee is not one of the two personnel
          files listed above. Access to a file dealing with an investigation
          shall be in accordance with the provisions of Florida Statute
          1012.31. If the preliminary investigation is concluded with the
          finding that there is not probably cause to proceed further and
          with no disciplinary action taken or charges filed, then the district
          will ask the Department of State, Division of Library and
          Information Services, for permission to destroy the investigation
          file.

     5.   Notification To Employee:          Items may not be placed in an
          employee's official personnel file unless the item has been made
          known to the employee, pursuant to the methodology described in
          Florida Statute 1012.31(2)(c). In addition, items challenged under
          the provisions of the grievance procedure may not be placed in the
          employee's file until the grievance has been resolved pursuant to
          the provisions of Article Thirty-Four of this contract. The employee
          shall have the right to respond to any item(s) to be placed in
          his/her personnel file and to have the response attached to such
          item. The employee's signature shall indicate only that he/she has
          read the item and shall not necessarily indicate agreement with its
          contents.

     6.   Review and Copying of File: Each employee shall have the right,
          upon request, to review and reproduce any contents of his/her
          personnel file. A representative of BTU may, at the request of the
          employee, accompany the employee in such reviews and may,
          upon written authorization by the employee, review and reproduce
          any contents of the employee's personnel file. The review or
          reproduction of the contents of an employee's personnel file shall
          be made in the presence of the administrator responsible for the
          safekeeping of such file. An employee's personnel file shall be open
          to inspection pursuant to the criteria and requirements in Florida
          Statute 1012.31.

F.   INSTRUCTIONAL PERSONNEL ASSESSMENT SYSTEM (IPAS)
     Employee Evaluation

     1.   Philosophy, Assumptions, and Guiding Principles

          a.    The School Board of Broward County and the Broward
                Teachers Union (BTU) believe that to provide the best
                education possible to students, competent, capable and
                caring instructional personnel must shape the educational



                                   18-6
     environment in which its students participate. The primary
     purpose of teacher assessment is the improvement of
     individual and collective teaching performance resulting in
     optimal student learning.

b.   The School Board and BTU acknowledge that the
     assessment process should recognize the professional nature
     of teaching and supervision. Educational research has not
     identified a single uni-dimensional construct called “effective
     teaching.” Teachers must pursue a variety of models of
     effective teaching.     It is recognized, moreover, that the
     educational environment is complex and variable and great
     weight should be placed on teacher judgment to guide the
     activities of student learning.

c.   The system must delineate responsibilities to assist
     individual in improving deficiencies as well as contribute to
     their professional growth and development. The system
     must also ensure prompt exchange of performance data
     between teacher and administrator. The result is an effective
     assessment system that provides the basis for a collective
     school climate focused on student learning.

d.   The Instructional Personnel Assessment System was
     founded on assumptions which relate to the design of an
     assessment system, teachers as individuals, the assessor,
     procedures, and instruments.

e.   Assumptions

     1.    The major goal of an assessment system is
           instructional improvement.
     2.    A sound assessment system focuses on teacher
           performance.
     3.    The assessment system links programs to professional
           development activities.
     4.    The assessment system recognizes outstanding
           teaching performance.
     5.    The result of a sound and progressive assessment
           system is a climate in which administrators and
           teachers work to take collective responsibility for
           student progress.
     6.    A comprehensive orientation program helps teachers
           to
           a) understand the system;



                        18-7
           b) prepare for the assessment; and
           c) respond to the results of the assessment.
     7.    The teacher wants to be a competent professional.
     8.    Instruction is the primary element in the overall role of
           the teacher. It is possible to assess differences in
           teacher performance. The assessor has a commitment
           to instructional improvement.
     9.    The process encourages diversity in teaching behavior.
     10.   The effectiveness of teaching behavior is best assessed
           in light of learner, school and/or school system
           characteristics, needs, and organizational structure.
     11.   The process focuses on patterns of teaching behavior
           that contribute to effective student learning.
     12.   Multiple sources of data are used to the development
           of a complete picture of teacher performance.
     13.   All teaching can improve with additional support or
           assistance.
     14.   The assessment process should impact significantly on
           personnel decisions.
     15.   The instrument(s) are understood by all teachers and
           administrators.
     16.   The instrument(s) assess the performance of
           competencies/ skills considered important to effective
           teaching.

f.   Guiding Principles

     1.    The labor-management committee which designed the
           Instructional Personnel Assessment System developed
           the following principles to guide the initial
           implementation and ongoing operation of the system.

           a.    Administrators and teachers should be familiar
                 with specific models of effective instructional
                 strategies.

           b.    Teachers and administrators using this system
                 should be trained.

           c.    The system should promote professional and
                 organizational growth.

           d.    The process should be appropriate for all
                 specialties and assignments.




                        18-8
               e.    The system should be reasonably easy to
                     administer.

               f.    The assessment     process   must    meet   legal
                     requirements.

               g.    The system should be based on the principle
                     that performance can improve to higher levels of
                     competency.

               h.    ulti-dimensional approach shall be taken for
                     assessment i.e., not every teacher is intensively
                     assessed annually.

               i.    Administrators, peers, curriculum specialists,
                     and others should be included as a regular
                     integrated part of the assessment process.

               j.    The process should take a supportive, positive
                     approach toward improving performance which
                     acknowledges competence.

               k.    The district must make a financial commitment
                     to make the evaluation system work.

2.   Components and Procedures of the System

     a.   Responsibilities:       The following persons, groups,
          departments, and offices are responsible for implementing
          components of the IPAS.

          1.   Principals
               The principal implements IPAS activities at the school
               level. He or she is responsible for ensuring that each
               instructional employee is oriented and that the
               required assessment is completed. He or she may
               delegate some data collection activities to another
               administrator in the school.

          2.   Annual Contract Teachers
               Teachers employed on annual contracts participate in
               the orientation program, review procedures, review
               criteria, and request assistance related to their
               performance, as needed.




                           18-9
3.   Teachers on Professional Services or Continuing
     Contract
     Teachers employed on a continuing contract
     participate in the orientation program, review
     procedures, review criteria, and request assistance
     related to their performance, as needed. In addition,
     they may participate in professional educator
     development activities organized for the IPAS.

4.   Division of Human Resources
     The Division of Human Resources develops and
     distributes an annual schedule of assessment
     activities. In addition, it receives completed forms,
     ensures the implementation of the system, and
     maintains assessment records in personnel files. The
     Division of Human Resources coordinates the
     Instructional Personnel Assessment Committee with
     the Broward Teachers Union. The Division periodically
     collaborates with the Department of Program
     Evaluation to evaluate the IPAS.

5.   Office for Professional Standards
     This office makes direct interventions with principals
     and teachers when performance is determined to be
     unsatisfactory. In addition, it coordinates the New
     Educator Support System (NESS).

6.   Human Resource Development Department
     This department coordinates training programs for
     assessors and teachers.

7.   Broward Teachers Union
     The Union supports the implementation of the IPAS
     through representation on the Instructional Personnel
     Assessment Committee.

8.   Instructional Personnel Assessment Committee
     This committee is responsible for monitoring and
     modifying the IPAS as needed.          The committee
     monitors the implementation of the IPAS. During the
     2004-2005 school year, the parties agree to develop
     necessary procedures to bring the IPAS into
     compliance with Florida Statutes including but not
     limited to implementation of the career ladder in 2005.
     The parties also agree that they will continue to work



                 18-10
          on a system of peer assistance review, which may or
          may not be included in the career ladder design.

     9.   Superintendent
          The Superintendent shall notify the Department of
          Education of any instructional personnel who receive
          two (2) consecutive unsatisfactory annual evaluations
          and who have been given written notice by the District
          that their employment is being terminated or is not
          being renewed or that the School Board intends to
          terminate, or not renew, their employment.

b.   Employee Orientation

     1.   Employee orientation is an essential component of the
          IPAS. The principal or designee conducts an
          orientation program at the beginning of each school
          year. Instructional personnel are advised of the
          following points:
          a.     Assessment criteria
          b.     Assessment forms
          c.     Assessment procedures and timelines

     2.   Each new employee is given a copy of the assessment
          form and the assessment criteria before September
          15th or upon employment subsequent to September
          15th.

c.   Assessors

     Formal assessment of employees under this system shall be
     conducted by the appropriate administrators charged with
     the responsibility.

d.   Training

     1.   Training, is conducted for school-based administrators
          and teachers to ensure the IPAS is implemented on a
          uniform basis across the District. Nine (9) training
          programs support the IPAS.        The following table
          provides the name of each program and participation
          requirements.




                      18-11
TRAINING PROGRAM
              Administrative        Assistant      Principals   Teachers
                 Interns            Principals

Florida
Performance                                                      
Measurement
System (FPMS)

FPMS Update
every other                                                      
year

FPMS Overview                                                    

New Educator                                                     
Support
System

Interaction                                                      
Management

Clinical
Educator                                                         
Program

Instructional                                                    
Personnel                                                        in cycle
Assessment
System (IPAS)

IPAS Update                                                      

IPAS                                                             
Orientation

-Training is    - Training is
required           optional

                2.   All assessors are required to complete the program
                     entitled:

                     Instructional  Personnel      Assessment      System
                     Comprehensive.

                     Major topics presented during this program are listed
                     below:


                                  18-12
a.   The District’s philosophy and guiding principles
     regarding the assessment of instructional
     personnel.

b.   The components of the IPAS.

c.   Understanding and interpreting assessment
     criteria.

d.   Completing assessment forms.

e.   Using rating scales.

f.   Preparing written documentation.

g.   Orientation requirements and methods.

h.   Professional educator development activities.

i.   Performance development plans and
     interventions.

j.   Collecting performance data through
     observations.

k.   Collecting performance data through other
     means.

l.   Current contract provisions and contract
     administration requirements.

m.   Due process and legal considerations.

n.   Conferencing skills.

o.   Remediation interventions.

p.   Implementation of the IPAS with employees
     assigned to different types of contracts including
     annual contracts, professional services
     contracts, and continuing contracts.




           18-13
e.   Required Assessments

     1.    At least one (1) assessment of each employee will be
           conducted by the principal, director, or his/her
           designee.

     2.    The IPAS is used with all instructional personnel
           including teachers, media specialists, guidance
           counselors, etc.

           a.    Assessment of Beginning Teachers

                 1.    Assessment of employees enrolled in the
                       New Educator Support System (NESS)
                       conforms to the procedures for the
                       evaluation of annual contract teachers
                       contained in this contract. Observations,
                       documentation,        and    conferences
                       completed for these employees supports
                       the completion of the assessment form
                       required for the IPAS.

                 2.    The Board shall provide all teachers in the
                       NESS a packet of pertinent information
                       related to the Program.

           b.    Assessment of Psychologists and Other
                 Employees
                 Psychologists and other employees whose
                 assignments      essentially  involve   extensive
                 individual casework shall be assessed by
                 observation and review of assigned casework at
                 least once annually. Such assessment(s) shall
                 be conducted by the Director or Area
                 Coordinators of Psychological Services for
                 psychologists and the similar respective program
                 director for other employees.

f.   Data Collection

     The following five (5) techniques are used to gather data on
     employee performance. Assessors use multiple techniques
     to understand actual performance and develop performance
     ratings.



                       18-14
1.   Informal    classroom   observations:        Informal
     observations are made periodically by the principal or
     designee.   A follow-up conference is not required
     subsequent to an informal classroom observation if
     performance is deemed satisfactory.

2.   Formal     classroom      observations:         Formal
     observations are primarily initiated by the principal or
     designee. Employees may, however, request a formal
     observation. These are not less than 30 minutes in
     duration and are conducted by the principal, director
     or his/her designee. The 30 minute time period may
     be shortened by mutual agreement between the
     principal and the affected employee. All observations
     of employees for the purpose of assessment shall be
     conducted openly with the full knowledge of the
     employee. A conference is conducted after each formal
     observation. The FPMS or other educationally sound
     observation instruments which may be used for formal
     observations.

3.   Observations       in   non-classroom      situations:
     Principals use opportunities outside the classroom to
     observe the performance of employees. A follow-up
     conference is not required subsequent to this type of
     observation if performance is deemed satisfactory.

4.   Review of records and plans:       Principals review a
     variety of work samples prepared by the employee.
     These may include lesson plans, reports, grade card
     comments, discipline referral documents, etc.       In
     addition, specific records or plans may be requested
     for review. A follow-up conference is not required
     subsequent to a review of records or plans if
     performance is deemed satisfactory.

5.   Review of performance portfolio: The principal or
     designee and the employee may mutually decide that a
     performance portfolio is needed to provide additional
     information for the completion of the assessment
     ratings. The design of a portfolio is determined by the
     principal and employee. A follow-up conference is not
     required subsequent to the submission of a




                 18-15
          performance     portfolio   if   performance   is   deemed
          satisfactory.

g.   Formal Observations

     1.   Prior to each formal assessment of personnel on an
          annual contract, no fewer than one (1) observation in
          the classroom or equivalent work location, of no less
          than 30 minutes will be conducted by the principal,
          director or his/her designee during the first semester
          of the contract period. The 30 minute time period may
          be shortened by mutual agreement between the
          principal and the affected employee.        All formal
          observations of employees for the purpose of
          assessment shall be conducted openly with the full
          knowledge of the affected employee. Any classroom
          observations or other factors which are used for
          assessment purposes shall be included on the formal
          assessment and discussed with the employee. No
          formal observations shall be conducted during the last
          week of the school year.

     2.   Principals and designee may use the FPMS structured
          observation instrument in formal observations.

          a.    Notification - Initial Observation of First Year
                Annual Contract Teachers
                For the first required observation of the first year
                annual contract employees the assessor shall
                notify the employee in advance of the week in
                which the observation is to take place. However,
                employees with a continuing contract may
                receive no advance notification of observation.

          b.    Employee Requested Follow-up Observation
                The employee may request a follow-up formal
                observation.      Such observation shall be
                conducted not less than ten (10) working days
                from the date of the request and shall be at least
                thirty (30) minutes in length, unless the affected
                employee and principal mutually agree to a
                shorter time period. Such observations shall be
                discussed and incorporated into the assessment
                process in accordance with this section, if




                      18-16
                requested prior     to   the   final   assessment
                conference.

h.   Conferences

     Conferences are used to communicate the results of data
     collection activities and the completion of the assessment
     form.      Assessors are encouraged to give feedback to
     employees on a regular and frequent basis through formal
     and      informal    conferences.      Feedback    includes
     recommendations for individual professional development
     and performance improvement.

     1.   Post Observation Conference:      Not later than ten
          (10) working days after each observation and prior to
          completion of the assessment form, the assessor shall
          meet with the employee to discuss the intended
          written, formal assessment.

     2.   Employee Requested Follow-up Conference: Upon
          request of the employee, the assessor shall schedule a
          follow-up conference at which the employee may be
          represented. Any change in the assessment as a
          result of this conference shall be initialed or signed by
          the assessor and employee and the final assessment
          shall be treated in a manner consistent with this
          section.

     3.   Annual Assessment Conference:          A conference is
          conducted with each employee to review the annual
          assessment form. After such discussion and upon
          completion of the formal assessment, the assessor and
          the employee shall sign the assessment form, with a
          copy to the employee before it is placed in the
          employee’s personnel file.    Such signature by the
          employee only acknowledges that the report has been
          read and does not necessarily indicate agreement with
          its contents. No employee shall be required to sign a
          blank or incomplete assessment form. The employee
          will be provided a copy of the signed assessment form
          within ten (10) working days following the discussion.
          No assessments and final assessment conferences
          shall be conducted during the last week of the school
          year.




                      18-17
     4.    Refusal To Sign Documents: An employee's refusal
           to sign evaluation forms and any disciplinary action
           forms that may be required/generated under the
           provisions of this article, shall not constitute any
           ground for insubordination or for other action against
           the employee, when such signature is for the purpose
           of acknowledging that the document has been read
           and does not necessarily indicate agreement with its
           contents.

i.   Assessment Form

     1.    The assessment form contained in Appendix I is used
           to document performance ratings. It is used for all
           instructional personnel. The form is completed by the
           assessor and signed by the employee. The employee’s
           signature indicates only that he/she has read the form
           and does not necessarily indicate agreement with its
           content.

     2.    Assessment forms will include the           period of
           assessment and the date or dates            of formal
           observations.

     3.    The final assessment form and any attachments
           thereto become the complete documentary record of
           the employee’s performance during the particular
           performance period.

j.   Assessment Criteria

     Specific assessment criteria are defined in each of the
     following areas: A complete list of these criteria and
     respective performance indicators are contained in Appendix
     I.

k.   Rating Scales

     Two rating scales are used for the IPAS as indicated below.

     1.    Rating Scale for Assessment Criteria

           a.    Satisfactory




                       18-18
          b.    Needs Improvement: Use of this rating requires
                written documentation and the implementation
                of a Performance Development Plan (See Section
                m).

          c.    Unsatisfactory: Use of this rating requires
                written documentation and implementation of a
                Performance Development Plan (See Section m).

     2.   Rating Scale for Overall Performance

          a.    Satisfactory

          b.    Needs Improvement: This rating is used only
                when the performance of an annual contract
                employee needs improvement for one or more of
                the     assessment      criteria    following the
                implementation of a Performance Development
                Plan (See Section m).            For purposes of
                reemployment of first or second year annual
                contract employees or for recommendation of an
                employee for Professional Services Contract only,
                a Needs Improvement rating shall have the same
                effect as a Satisfactory rating.

          c.    Unsatisfactory - Decision rule: This rating is
                used only when the performance of the employee
                remains at an unsatisfactory level for one or
                more of the assessment criteria following the
                implementation of a Performance Development
                Plan (See Section m). The principal notifies the
                Office of Professional Standards when this rating
                is used.

l.   Professional Educator Development:

     1.   This component provides instructional personnel
          opportunities to work individually or participate as a
          member of a team and focus on the improvement of
          instructional practices and school improvement.
          Appendix I contains more information on this
          component.

     2.   This component is available to employees assigned to
          either a professional services contract or a continuing



                      18-19
          contract. Employees contract. Employees may elect to
          participate in the activities described below.

          a.    Work individually or together to devise a plan
                that includes:
                -      objectives directed at school improvement
                       consistent with the school’s strategic plan,
                -      objectives directed at the development of
                       team members,
                -      development or improvement of advanced
                       pedagogical skills,
                -      strategies for addressing each objective,
                -      a timeline, and
                -      a description of final product(s).

          b.    Coordinate their activities.

          c.    Meet individually or as a team with the principal
                or designee at least three times.

          d.    Create a final product consistent with objectives.

m.   Performance Development Plans

     1.   When a rating of Needs Improvement or Unsatisfactory
          is used, a Performance Development Plan is developed
          by the principal in collaboration with the employee. A
          copy of this plan is contained in Appendix I.

     2.   Use and implementation of this plan requires:

          a.    identification of deficiencies,

          b.    definition of strategies for improvement,

          c.    definition of an assistance timeline,

          d.    definition of expected outcomes,

          e.    definition of possible consequences for failure to
                remediate,

          f.    multiple formal observations and conferences,

          g.    completion of assistance activities, and



                      18-20
           h.      documentation.

     3.    These plans should be implemented during the first
           semester whenever possible.

     4.    When the overall performance of an employee is
           determined to be Unsatisfactory on the final
           assessment, the Office for Professional Standards is
           notified.

n.   Use of Data

     Assessment data are used to develop ratings which are
     recorded on the assessment form. The forms become part of
     the employee’s personnel file. Data are used in decision-
     making for personnel selection, training, promotion,
     placement, and other matters consistent with School Board
     policy.

o.   Sequence of IPAS Events

     The flow charts in Appendix I illustrates the sequence of
     IPAS events for annual contract employees and two
     categories of continuing contract employees. In addition an
     illustration of events for an employee on prescription is
     included. These are included for illustrative purposes
     only and do not supersede any procedures defined in this
     Article.

p.   Parental Input

     Within thirty (30) days after the start of each school year,
     parents shall be notified in writing by each school
     administration of their right to provide input into employee
     performance assessments when appropriate in accordance
     with F.S. 1012.34.

q.   Performance Based Pay

     1.    In compliance with Florida Statutes, the parties have
           agreed to implement a performance based pay program
           for instructional personnel. This program shall allow
           instructional personnel who demonstrate outstanding
           performance as defined by statute to earn a monetary



                        18-21
     supplement in addition to their individual, negotiated
     salary.

2.   In order to be eligible for this supplement, employees
     must have earned satisfactory performance ratings for
     their most recent three years, as well as the current
     year. In addition to employment in the District, the
     parties shall recognize employment experience from
     outside the District for which it has granted employee
     experience credit.       It shall be the employee’s
     responsibility to provide documentation verifying
     satisfactory performance ratings not earned within the
     District.

3.   Employees desiring to participate in this process shall
     be assigned to one of two tracks. Assignment shall be
     based on the employee’s work assignment and/or
     eligibility to participate in the National Board
     Certification process. Employees eligible and assigned
     to a position where it is feasible to participate in the
     National Board process shall be required to do so. The
     IPAS Committee shall make final determination of
     track assignment.

4.   Upon attainment of National Board Certification
     successful candidates shall receive the negotiated
     supplement (see Appendix F) for as long as they hold
     their certification and continue to earn satisfactory
     annual assessment ratings. Employees forfeiting said
     supplement due to unsatisfactory annual assessment
     shall regain eligibility upon receiving a satisfactory
     rating. Payment of the supplement shall resume at
     the beginning of the following year providing the
     employee meets eligibility requirements.

5.   Employees      currently    holding   National   Board
     Certification shall receive the supplement, prorated
     equally over each pay period. Employees earning
     certification for the first time during the 2002-2003
     school year and thereafter shall receive said
     supplement prorated equally over each remaining pay
     period as well as a single payment retroactive to the
     start of the employees’ work calendar covering all prior
     pay periods.




                 18-22
6.   Employees not eligible to participate in the National
     Board Certification Process (currently including but
     not limited to school social workers, psychologists,
     occupational and physical therapists, speech language
     pathologists, adult education teachers, guidance and
     family counselors, and health teachers) shall be
     eligible to participate in an alternative program, the
     Broward County Recognition Program (BCRP). Said
     program, similar in format to the National Board
     Certification process, includes portfolio documentation
     with artifacts, videotaping of job performance, as well
     as written work samples.         Successful candidates
     participating in BCRP shall receive the negotiated
     supplement (see Appendix F) for three consecutive
     years and may be renewed in subsequent years so long
     as they continue to earn satisfactory annual
     assessment ratings.          Employees forfeiting said
     supplement due to unsatisfactory annual assessment
     shall become eligible for and receive payment upon
     satisfactorily fulfilling the terms of the professional
     development plan resulting from the unsatisfactory
     rating and receiving a satisfactory rating. Participation
     in the BCRP process requires and application fee of
     $60.

7.   A panel comprised of National Board Certified teachers
     and/or other appropriately trained peers shall evaluate
     candidate’s submissions. Assessments shall be based
     on a scored scale. Employees serving on the panel
     shall be paid at their hourly rate for all such work
     beyond their regular workday.

8.   At the conclusion of the first year of the program, the
     parties agree that the IPAS Committee shall evaluate
     the panel’s effectiveness and report its findings to the
     CAC. The CAC shall review the findings and decide if
     the composition of the panel should be changed or
     remain the same. The parties agree to negotiate the
     minimum supplement for the Broward County
     Recognition Program at the conclusion of the first year.
     The parties shall consider the success rate of the local
     applicants compared to that of applicants for the
     NBPTS certification in Broward County as a factor for
     any such agreement.




                 18-23
9.    A subcommittee of the IPAS Committee is currently
      establishing the BCRP procedures.           The IPAS
      Committee is authorized to establish necessary
      procedures and to recommend contract modifications
      to the CAC. The CAC is authorized to modify the
      Collective Bargaining Agreement to include appropriate
      procedures.

10.   If the statute requiring a supplement for outstanding
      teachers is no longer in effect, the parties agree to
      make the program contained in this section a subject
      of negotiations.




                  18-24
                          ARTICLE NINETEEN
                     PROFESSIONAL COMPENSATION


A.   Salary Schedule: The basic salaries of employees shall be as set forth
     in Appendix E, which is attached to and incorporated in this Agreement
     for the full number of workdays in accordance with Article Twenty-Seven.
     The parties will form a committee to study the feasibility of developing a
     knowledge based salary schedule to reward training and degree
     achievement and the feasibility of offering incentives for teachers to
     transfer to low-performing schools. Committee recommendations shall
     be submitted to the Contract Administration Committee for preliminary
     approval. Modifications to the salary schedule and/or supplementary
     pay schedule shall be ratified and adopted by both parties prior to
     implementation.

B.   Military Service: Full credit (up to four [4] years) will be allowed for
     military service if under contract at the time of induction. Any employee
     previously granted more than four (4) years of credit for such service
     shall continue to receive such credit as previously granted if under
     contract at the time of induction. Up to an additional four (4) years of
     credit may be granted provided such additional years of service is related
     to educational responsibilities.

C.   Stipends:      Bargaining unit members may qualify for stipends for
     advanced degrees which are "in-field." Employees who held out-of-field
     stipends on the date of contract ratification by the BTU for the 1994-95
     school year shall be allowed to continue to receive said stipends until
     they leave the employment of the District.

D.   Salary Adjustments:           Verification of the completion of course
     requirements for adjustment to a higher salary level must be received by
     the Division of Human Resources not later than November 1st, first
     semester and not later than April 1st, second semester.            Salary
     adjustments to the verified higher rate will not be made if received after
     such dates submitted by the employee to the Certification Department of
     the Division of Human Resources. If the verification is received during
     the year the course requirements are completed, the adjustment shall be
     made retroactively to the date of completion. If the verification is
     received after the year the course requirements have been completed, the
     adjustment shall be made retroactively to the beginning of the school
     year in which the verification is received.

E.   Credit for Teaching Experience: Effective July 1, 2002, pursuant to
     Florida State Statute all newly hired eligible employees shall receive
     experience credit for all previous teaching experience in the State of
     Florida or other teaching experience in a school district accredited by a

                                    19-1
     recognized accrediting agency. No credit in excess of that authorized by
     the salary schedule shall be given, although no such credit previously
     granted by the Board will be retracted. Current employees not yet
     granted experience credit for prior teaching experience shall be placed on
     the appropriate level of the salary schedule to reflect credit for all prior
     experience. Such placement shall occur on July 1, 2009.

     Verification of previous employment must be received by the Division of
     Human Resources not later than four (4) months from the beginning date
     of employment in any school year to be effective during that school year.
     Individuals employed within the last four (4) months of the school year
     must furnish verification prior to the issuance of their last check. All
     final checks will reflect only verified experience. Verified remunerated
     teaching experience under contract, or its equivalent, for one (1) day
     more than half the contract calendar will constitute a year of experience
     for this schedule.

     Substitute Status Changed to Full Time Employee: An employee who
     served as a substitute employee in the same position to which the
     employee is later appointed by the Board, and where such substitute
     service immediately precedes such appointment, shall be paid
     retroactively at the employee's contracted salary rate for such substitute
     service. Retroactive pay shall include paid holidays and accrual of sick
     leave days. Days worked in such substitute status shall count toward
     seniority and toward experience credit. The Contract Administration
     Committee shall discuss a process to review the termination of
     probationary employees.

F.   Supplementary pay positions: shall be those as set forth in Appendix F,
     which is attached to and incorporated in this Agreement. Employees
     assigned to such positions shall be paid in accordance with said
     Appendix and all other provisions of this Agreement. The seven and one-
     half (7 1/2) hour day shall apply to the basic salary schedule only.
     Employees drawing supplemental pay or pay higher than the basic
     schedule may be assigned hours beyond the basic seven and one-half (7
     1/2) hour day when such assignment is in the work area for which the
     supplement is paid.

     1.    Appendix F of this contract provides for supplements for
           department heads at high schools. Department heads employed at
           the District's three (3) vocational centers shall have their
           supplement pro-rated over 242 work days or over the payroll
           selection option made annually.

     2.    Qualifications: To receive the supplements for department head
           or team leader, a bargaining unit employee must meet the
           minimum requirements contained in the affected job descriptions.


                                     19-2
          However, an employee may receive the full supplement and not
          meet one (1) or more at the minimum job qualifications if:

          a.    The member(s) of the team/department who meet all the
                qualifications decline to run or accept the nomination to the
                position.

          b.    No one in the team/department meets the minimum job
                qualifications.

G.   Salary/Hourly Rate:

     1.   The salary of any employee employed in excess of the 196 day work
          year shall be computed at a daily rate of 1/196 of the employee's
          basic annual contracted salary times the number of days
          employed. The salary of an employee in summer school shall be
          computed on an hourly rate based on 1/196 of the employee's
          regular annual contracted salary divided by 7.5 times the number
          of hours worked. One fourth (1/4) hour of planning time on
          campus with pay shall be counted per hour of student contact time
          in computing the total hours worked per day, provided that no
          employee shall be assigned fewer than two (2) hours of student
          contact time.

          Exceptions may be made for participation in Board-approved local,
          state or federal projects or programs on a voluntary basis beyond
          the normal workday or calendar. Employees who volunteer to
          work programs beyond the workday/workyear shall be informed in
          writing of the compensation, duration of the program, proposed
          pay date, prior to the beginning of the assignment.          Such
          employees may not grieve the level of compensation provided that
          said compensation is the amount stated in the notice signed by the
          employee.

     2.   Extra Pay: Employees receiving extra pay for agreeing to teach an
          extra period above and beyond a regular teaching load, e.g.
          teaching a sixth period in a high school, teaching an extra period
          in a high school with block scheduling, etc., shall receive said
          payment for all work days including planning days, early release
          days, field trips on workdays, approved TDA’s, etc. A teacher
          absent without leave shall not receive said pay. Said teacher who
          is on sick leave will be paid for all the hours in his/her regularly
          scheduled day. An employee’s sick leave balance shall be reduced
          by an amount that reflects the employee’s regularly scheduled day.
          A one day reduction shall not exceed the monthly accrual rate.
          Employees hired to teach for the District’s virtual school for less
          than full time shall be compensated at their hourly rate and

                                   19-3
           treated in a manner consistent with those teachers teaching an
           extra period above and beyond a regular teaching load.

H.   Special Program Experience:         Recognized programs including Peace
     Corps, VISTA, shall be uniformly accepted in lieu of teaching experience
     if related to the assigned position provided, except for Peace Corps and
     VISTA experience, that at least one (1) year of contract teaching
     experience can also be verified at the time of employment.


     Other Experience for Credit:
     1.   Employees hired after June 30, 2003 including but not limited to
          those with alternate certificates teaching three (3) or more hours of
          a subject in which they have had directly related work experience
          will be granted experience credit on the salary schedule in
          Appendix E for each year of verified experience not to exceed the
          maximum allowed in Section E above.

     2.    Employees hired after June 30, 2003, other than classroom
           teachers, (Speech therapists, physical therapists, clinical social
           workers and family counselors) with no previous teaching
           experience will be granted experience credit on the salary schedule
           in Appendix E, for each year of verified directly related work
           experience credit:

     3.    There shall be no reduction in experience credit previously granted
           as a result of the implementation of the above provisions.

I.   Mileage/Parking/Tolls Reimbursement:             Any employee required to
     own or have continuing access to an automobile in order properly to
     perform assigned duties shall be provided expense reimbursement at the
     rate specified by the Legislature, but no lower than that specified in
     Board Policy, for business travel or mileage. All adjustments approved
     by the Legislature or the Board shall be passed along to teachers on the
     effective date specified in the affected legislation or by the Board. The
     actual cost of tolls and parking when on district business shall also be
     reimbursed      by    the    Board.        Employees     participating on
     labor/management committees shall be reimbursed for mileage, parking,
     and tolls under this section.

J.   Travel Reimbursement: Any employee traveling on school district
     business, other than as provided in Section HI above, shall be
     reimbursed in accordance with Board policy on travel and per diem
     expenses.

K.   Special Activities: Each elementary school art or music teacher who
     accept assignments to work with students beyond the normal work

                                    19-4
     hours without a supplement for the activity (art fair, musical
     performances, etc.) shall be compensated at the rate of $75 per
     assignment up to a maximum of three (3) programs per year. Employees
     in vocal or instrumental music assignments shall have the right to
     accept or reject requests for performance by musical groups to which
     they are assigned beyond the hours provided for supplemental pay.
     Employees who apply for a task assignment supplement for such
     performances in lieu of the above compensation shall receive the
     supplement only if the activities specified in the announcement of the
     supplement are provided; otherwise, the employee shall receive
     compensation as stipulated above.

L.   Admission to Events: Employees shall be admitted, without charge, to
     any school sponsored athletic event within the district and to events
     sponsored by their primary work location. The provision shall not apply
     to state athletic playoff events, banquets, grad night, and/or prom unless
     the request for participation has been approved by the Principal. The
     employee will provide some form of identification that verifies their school
     board employment to gain admission. This shall apply to employees
     only.

M.   Voluntary Participation: Employee participation in extra-curricular
     activities or in extra-duty assignments shall be strictly voluntary.

N.   Salary Payments:

     1.    The School Board of Broward County, Florida (SBBC) and the
           Broward Teachers Union (BTU) mutually agree that bargaining
           unit members shall be paid for the number of paid days in a pay
           period. The dollar amount of their first and last paycheck can vary
           from the paycheck received during the remainder of the bargaining
           unit member’s contract year.

           Pay dates will be set for every other Friday, except if the first pay
           date of the bargaining unit member's contract year does not fall on
           the second Friday, a partial pay check will be cut for the number of
           days worked in the first week on the second Friday.

     2.    A Paid Day shall be defined as all days from the start date through
           the end date of a bargaining unit member’s contract year,
           excluding weekends (unless they are part of the bargaining unit
           member’s work schedule). For the majority of teachers, a work
           calendar is comprised of 214 paid days for the fiscal year 2007-
           2008.

     3.    Bargaining unit members shall earn their salary at the Equalized
           Daily Rate. A bargaining unit member’s Equalized Daily Rate of

                                     19-5
           Pay shall be calculated based upon dividing the annual salary by
           the number of paid days in the bargaining unit member’s work
           calendar. Upon termination, bargaining unit members shall be
           paid through their last day worked at the Equalized Daily Rate.

     4.    Bargaining unit members may select the Year-Round Pay Option if
           they want to receive pay during summer months.

     5.    Each employee on a full time basis shall receive four days of sick
           leave as of the first day of employment of each contract year, and
           thereafter earn ½ day of sick leave for each pay period of
           employment until the maximum accrual is met.

     6.    The number of deductions for voluntary benefits such as union
           dues and cancer insurance will be standardized at 20.

     7.    The parties agree to review the changes in the payroll program
           annually and propose modifications as necessary in contract
           language to improve its efficiency and customer friendliness. This
           review shall be initiated no later than October 31st and concluded
           no later than January 13th of each school year. Such changes as
           agreed to and approved by both parties shall be authorized for
           implementation for the following school year.            Topics for
           consideration shall include, but not be limited to, options for new
           employees, deductions for union dues and other contributions,
           variance from equal pay amounts for the first and last paychecks
           of a fiscal year, the schedule for issuing paychecks, direct deposit
           limitations and requirements, payroll cards, and procedures for
           current and new employee selection of payroll options. In addition,
           the review shall study the income anticipated to be produced for
           the District from the money retained to pay teachers year-round
           during this and subsequent school years with the intention of
           returning such income to the benefit of employees.

     8.    It is the intent of the parties to make applicable salary adjustments
           for employees within a time period not to exceed forty-five (45) days
           from the date of Board approval.

O.   Direct Deposit: Employees shall be able to directly deposit their
     paychecks to any bank or savings and loan institution or credit union
     accepting such services. Employees shall be required to have their
     salaries paid via direct deposit to the financial institution of their choice.
     Direct deposits shall be deposited in no more than five (5) financial
     institutions. The District shall not withdraw funds from any of the above
     institutions on or after the effective date of a paycheck without the
     express written consent of the employee. (Note: Even though the
     withdrawal will be made prior to the effective date of the paycheck, an

                                      19-6
     employee’s bank statement may reflect such transaction occurring on the
     effective date of the paycheck.) If funds are withdrawn prior to the
     effective date of the check, the employee will be notified in writing of the
     actual amount of the deposit if the amount is different from that printed
     on the remuneration statement on the effective date of the paycheck.
     The employee will be notified of the reasons for the adjustment within
     three (3) working days of the effective date of the paycheck.

P.   Employee Absences: Deductions for personnel during the regular
     school term for daily absences not covered by provisions of this
     Agreement shall be made at the rate of 1/196 of the annual contractual
     salary per day except for those employees who have a greater than or less
     than 196 day contract year.

Q.   Errors In Paycheck

     1.    Underpayment - In the event of a change which results in an
           underpayment to an employee, the employee shall be properly
           compensated on or before the next possible paycheck following
           discovery of the error. The District shall provide the employee with
           specific written explanation for the underpayment through the
           Payroll Contact Person at the employee’s location. The parties
           agree to continue to research the timeline outlined in Florida
           Statute, Chapter 95, Section 11(4)(c), for the collection of wage
           underpayment, for resolution no later than November 1, 2007.

     2.    Overpayment $100 or less - If an employee has been overpaid by
           $100 or less, a corrective adjustment shall be made automatically
           in the affected employee’s next paycheck. The employee shall be
           notified by their location payroll contact person prior to said
           adjustment and the deduction will be reflected on the employee’s
           pay stub as an adjustment.        The District shall provide the
           employee with specific written explanation for the overpayment
           through the Payroll Contact Person at the employee’s location.

     3.    Overpayment       Greater     than   $100    (except    for   former
           employees):

           a.    The School Board may collect overpayments not to exceed
                 two (2) years in duration from the date that the
                 administration mails the notification of overpayment letter to
                 the affected employee. For example, if an employee was
                 overpaid for the last five years, the Board can only recover
                 the most recent two years of the overpayment.

           b.    The Payroll Department shall notify the affected employee via
                 a Notice of Salary Adjustment Form that an overpayment in

                                       19-7
     excess of $100 has occurred. The form will contain two
     payback options for the employee from which the employee
     may select as well as specific written explanation for the
     overpayment. If the employee finds one of the options
     acceptable, he/she shall complete the form and return it to
     the Payroll Department.

c.   If the employee does not find either of the options mentioned
     in subsection (b) above acceptable, he/she will check the box
     on the form requesting a meeting with the Payroll
     Department and return the signed form.

d.   If the affected employee requests the meeting referenced in
     subsection b above or does not return the signed form within
     five (5) workdays of receipt thereof, the Payroll Department
     shall set-up a meeting with the affected employee for the
     purpose of determining how the overpayment will be
     recouped. The employee is entitled to be accompanied by a
     representative of his/her choice.

e.   Overpayments should be recouped in the calendar year in
     which it was discovered. However, if the financial burden in
     doing so would be excessive, the Superintendent may extend
     the repayment plan into the next fiscal year except for
     employees who are leaving the school system or are on a
     year long unpaid leave of absence.

f.   If the Payroll Department and the affected employee cannot
     reach an agreement on a payback schedule during the
     meeting    referenced    in    subsection  c   above,  the
     Superintendent will determine the payback schedule and the
     amount of dollars per paycheck and notify the employee by
     certified mail prior to the first paycheck reduction.* The
     number of payments in the pay back schedule shall not be
     less than the following:

     $1-$100.00               1 Payment
     $100.01- $500.00         4 Payments
     $500.01 - $1,000.00      8 Payments
     $1,000.01 - $1,800.00    12 Payments
     For amounts above $1,800.00 no payment shall exceed
     $200.00 per paycheck

     *If the affected employee is on an unpaid leave of absence,
     the payback will involve direct payment from the employee to
     the Board.



                        19-8
R.   Voluntary Inservice/Stipend Rate:

     1.    Bargaining unit members who attended and/or will attend District
           sponsored inservice workshops (including ESOL) during non-work
           hours shall receive compensation at the rate of fifteen dollars ($15)
           per hour if the federal government or the state legislature makes
           available a specific funding source. Funding sources must be
           specific and clearly indicate that the funds are to be spent on a
           designated program such as the Summer Institute. Funding
           sources may be listed in such locations as a federal grant, the
           State Appropriation Act or the School Board's budget.

     2.    Employees who provide District sponsored in-service workshops as
           trainers outside normal working hours (evenings and/or weekends)
           shall receive compensation at their hourly rate for all time spent in
           training and preparation for such training. Preparation time shall
           be provided at one-half the actual training time for employees
           providing a program for the first time and one-third of the program
           time for subsequent presentations of the same training program.
           Employees who are task assigned to a District Department may
           occasionally volunteer to flex their schedules to provide District in-
           service training programs outside normal working hours.

S.   Aggregate Method of Computing Taxes: The Board agrees to use the
     I.R.S. approved aggregate method of computing taxes on negotiated
     salary increases and one-time payments provided the I.R.S. allows this
     methodology at the time raises are paid.

T.   Cell Phone Reimbursement: The Board agrees to provide itinerant
     employees a stipend for the cost of using a personal cellular phone for
     job related purposes. Such employees shall receive a lump sum payment
     up to $350.00, less applicable taxes prior to the conclusion of their
     applicable work calendar for this purpose. For those employees working
     less than their work calendar, the stipend shall be prorated at a rate of
     $35.00 per month. Itinerant employees currently issued a cellular phone
     by the District shall be given the option annually of continuing to use the
     issued phone or receiving the lump sum payment. Selection shall be
     made by each employee no later than September 30th each year. In the
     absence of making a selection by the deadline date, employees shall
     continue with usage of the cellular phone.

     For the purposes of this benefit, Itinerant Teachers shall be defined as
     those teachers whose duties require daily travel to two or more locations
     to provide services to students and/or student populations and requires
     accessibility to a phone between locations.




                                     19-9
U.   School Assignments: School age children of an employee, including
     those of which they have legal guardianship, shall be eligible to attend
     school at the employee’s work location or any other appropriate school
     within the employee’s school zone with the exception of other schools
     within the zone at the same level to which an employee is assigned. For
     example, an employee assigned to a middle school in a zone cannot
     register a school age dependent at another middle school within the
     same zone under the provisions of this agreement. Employees choosing
     to send eligible children to schools other that their home schools shall
     provide transportation to and from school providing that regular school
     bus transportation is not available for that school in the area in which
     the child lives. Children of employees must meet all requirements prior
     to acceptance into any special program.

V.   Before and After-School Care: The Contract Administration Committee
     shall request a study of the feasibility and cost of providing before or
     after care for the school age children of employees in existing District
     programs. The resulting report shall be presented to the School Board
     for consideration.




                                   19-10
                       ARTICLE TWENTY
         PROMOTIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTARY PAY OPENINGS


A.   Posting of Positions: Notice of any opening for a promotional position
     shall be posted in all schools and departments by the Division of Human
     Resources.

B.   Notice of Openings:        Notice of any opening for a bargaining unit
     supplementary pay position shall be posted in the school in which the
     opening occurs if the position is open only to employees in that school. If
     the supplementary position is opened to personnel outside the school,
     the position shall be advertised in all schools and departments. All
     qualifications being essentially equal, preference in making
     supplementary appointments shall be given to applicants within the
     district.

C.   Content of the Notices: The notices of openings required by this Article
     shall include the school, where applicable, in which the opening will
     occur, the title of the position, effective date of the opening,
     qualifications, information concerning the securing of and deadline for
     filing of the application, and the person with whom the applicant is to be
     filed. All such notices shall be posted at least seven (7) workdays before
     the deadline for filing applications. During the summer months when
     the regular school calendar is not in operation or on an emergency basis
     during the regular school year, a vacant position may be filled on a
     temporary basis until the procedures of this Article can be followed.

D.   Qualified Employee: The applicant must be qualified for the position.
     Any eligible and qualified employee may apply for the position described
     in this Article, and all applicants will be given due consideration.

E.   Application Form: The applicant can secure application forms from the
     principal's office or from the Personnel office. The application shall be
     filed with the appropriate administrator.

F.   Qualifications:       A qualified applicant for any bargaining unit
     supplementary pay position will be accepted before any qualified non-
     applicant may be assigned to accept the position. If qualifications are
     essentially equal, preference in making appointments to supplementary
     pay positions shall be given to employees with seniority.           All
     supplementary pay positions shall be annually vacated.




                                     20-1
G.   Preference of Applicants:      All qualifications being essentially equal,
     preference in making promotional appointments shall be given to
     applicants from within the district.

H.   Written Notice of Status: All applicants for positions described in this
     Article shall receive written notice of the disposition of their applications
     promptly up filling of the position involved. All notices required in Section
     A above shall be made available to the BTU.




                                     20-2
                       ARTICLE TWENTY-ONE
                    ACHIEVEMENT INCENTIVE PAY


A.   Basic Incentive Award

     1.   Any employee holding continuing contract and a Rank III
          (Bachelor's Degree or equivalent) or Rank II (Master's Degree or
          equivalent) certificate is eligible for the Basic Incentive Award.

     2.   A minimum of fifteen (15) semester hours, earned after the date of
          the last degree, will be required to receive the Basic Incentive
          Award. A minimum of twelve (12) of the fifteen (15) hours must be
          in the teaching field and/or related subjects in order to earn an in-
          field Basic Incentive stipend.

     3.   Courses which are acceptable for the professional and for the
          specialization areas of certificate requirements are acceptable for
          the Basic Incentive Award Program.

     4.   All hours shall have been earned within ten (10) years prior to the
          awarding of the Basic Incentive Award.

     5.   Applications must be submitted to the Division of Human
          Resources by September 15th and supporting grade reports or
          transcripts must be received by October 1st.

     6.   Inservice programs will be recommended by the Superintendent
          and approved by the Board.

     7.   When an employee transfers to a different subject area teaching
          assignment, the award is subject to review.

     8.   Personnel will review applications, which have been disapproved,
          when requested in writing by the applicant.

B.   Advanced Incentive Award

     1.   An employee holding a Continuing Contract and a Rank II
          (Master's Degree or equivalent) and ten (10) years of Florida service
          and holds the original fifteen (15) hour Basic Incentive Award or is
          eligible simultaneously for both awards is eligible for the Advanced
          Incentive Award.




                                   21-1
     2.    A minimum of fifteen (15) semester hours, earned after the date of
           last degree, beyond what was required for the Basic Incentive
           Award will be required to receive the Advanced Incentive Award. A
           minimum of twelve (12) of the fifteen (15) hours must be in the
           teaching field and/or related subjects in order to earn the in-field
           Basic Incentive stipend.

     3.    Junior, senior or graduate level courses, which are acceptable for
           the professional and for the specialization areas of certification
           requirements are acceptable for the Advanced Incentive Award.

     4.    All hours shall have been earned within ten (10) years prior to the
           awarding of the Advanced Incentive Award.

     5.    Inservice progress may be used for Advanced Incentive Awards if
           approved by the Board.

     6.    When an employee transfers to a different subject area teaching
           assignment, the award is subject to review.

     7.    Personnel will review applications which have been disapproved,
           when requested in writing by the applicant.

     8.    Applications must be submitted to the Division of Human
           Resources by September 15th and supporting grade reports or
           transcripts must be received by October 1st.

     9.    An application is required for all employees even though it may be
           incomplete as to course work.

     10.   Work must be completed by the opening day of school for
           employees.

C.   Sabbatical Leave:

     Critical Shortage Area: Employees who are granted a sabbatical leave
     for the purpose of pursuing a plan leading to certification in an area in
     which a shortage of employees is developing, shall receive seventy-five
     percent (75%) of their base salary while on said sabbatical leave.

     To qualify for this section, an employee must meet all of the criteria and
     is subject to all of the procedures contained in Article Twenty-Three,
     Section D. A maximum of thirty (30) sabbaticals per year shall be
     reserved for this critical shortage area. In addition, employees who are




                                    21-2
     granted a sabbatical leave pursuant to this section shall agree in writing
     to teach in the district for three (3) years after returning from said leave.

D.   Continuity of Classroom Instruction:        To encourage and reward
     employees who assist in maintaining continuity of classroom instruction
     through good job attendance, the parties agree to the following incentive
     award:

     1.    Employees who utilize two (2) sick leave days or less each school
           year shall upon request receive payment for the number of sick
           leave days earned in said school year. For example, if a teacher is
           absent for sick leave purposes two (2) times during the 1995-96
           school year, he/she may receive payment for eight (8) days of sick
           leave, provided the employee worked the full school year.* The
           following procedures apply to the payment of sick leave under this
           section.

           (a)   An employee must have a minimum of twenty-five (25) days
                 of accumulated sick leave remaining after the payment for
                 unused sick leave under this section.

           (b)   The payment of this incentive shall be paid to eligible
                 employees no later than October 31st of the school year
                 following the school year in which the employee qualified for
                 the incentive pay.

           (c)   For purposes of this section, sick leave shall be defined
                 pursuant to all sections of F.S. 1012.61.

           (d)   Days for which such award payment is received shall be
                 deducted from the accumulated leave balance.

           (e)   Number of eligible days times the affected employee's daily
                 rate of base pay times eighty percent (80%).

           (f)   The application of this section commences with the 1983-84
                 school year. Employees may not receive this award for sick
                 leave earned prior to said school year.




                                     21-3
                          ARTICLE TWENTY-TWO
                               INSURANCE


A.   Coverage:     The Board shall provide, without cost to each employee,
     Group Term Life Insurance equal to one and one-quarter (1 1/4) times
     the employee's annual salary, rounded to the next higher multiple of one
     thousand dollars ($1,000), subject to a minimum of seven thousand
     dollars ($7,000) and a maximum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000). The
     employee shall have the option of purchasing at their own expense
     through payroll deduction, an additional amount of "group term" life
     insurance equal to that provided by the Board.

     Each employee shall have the option, at the employee's expense, through
     payroll deduction, to pre-convert the Group Term Life Insurance to
     ordinary life insurance prior to retirement or termination of employment.
     Each employee may also, at the employee's expense through payroll
     deduction, purchase additional amounts of insurance for the employee,
     the employee's spouse, and/or the employee's dependent children.

B.   1.    Premium Amount: The Board shall pay the following premiums
           for individual employees health and dental insurance for the life of
           this contract:

           The premiums paid by the Board shall be to provide employees’
           elected group health insurance plan (Humana/VISTA PPO plan or
           the Humana/VISTA HMO option or the Humana Consumer Driven
           Plan) plus a maximum of $10.80 per month toward dental
           insurance in accordance with the term and schedule of benefits in
           currently effect. The parties agree that the current insurance
           vendors may be deleted or new vendors added as providers as a
           result of future RFP health insurance awards.

           a.    The Board agrees to pay 100% of the health insurance
                 premiums for HMO and Consumer Driven Plan coverage for
                 the individual employee for the term of this agreement.

           b.    The Board agrees to implement a straight leveling model for
                 the payment of health insurance premiums.

                 1.    The Board’s contribution for the straight leveling
                       model will be determined by dividing the Board’s
                       estimated cost for the following year (as established by
                       responses to RFP’s received from insurance vendors in
                       the current year) by the number of all school board
                       employees (excluding dependents) enrolled in one of


                                    22-1
                 the Board’s health insurance plans during the current
                 calendar year.

           2.    If the monthly premium cost for health insurance
                 coverage elected by an employee is less than the
                 amount of the School Board’s straight leveling
                 contribution amount, the difference will be deposited
                 into a cafeteria plan for the benefit of that employee.

                 The employee shall be responsible for paying any
                 monthly premium cost above the Board’s straight
                 leveling contribution based upon the PPO coverage
                 selected by the employee.    This does not include
                 employees on HMO and Consumer Driven plan(s).

     c.    The Board agrees to utilize 50% of the savings received from
           the increase in cost sharing for PPO coverage to offset
           dependent coverage in the HMO. The remaining 50% of said
           savings shall be utilized for employee raises.

2.   All new employees may elect to enroll in a Board offered plan of
     their choice.

3.   After the Board has entered into a contract (s) with one or more
     vendors to provide group health insurance to bargaining unit
     members, during the fixed period of said contract (s) when
     premiums and benefit levels are established and guaranteed, the
     parties shall not modify established benefit levels or negotiate
     alternative benefit levels. However, if said contract(s) has options
     to renew the contract for one or more years beyond the
     established/guaranteed period, either party may demand
     negotiations through the Superintendent or designee to amend
     benefit levels for the specific purpose of cost containment, (e.g., co-
     payments, deductibles, etc.). All profit-sharing funds returned by
     the health insurance carriers in accordance with the utilization
     targets delineated in the health insurance agreements with the
     School Board shall be applied to offset the plan’s dependent care
     coverage for the subsequent year.

4.   An employee eligible for health insurance may volunteer to decline
     such insurance. Said employee shall be required to sign an
     affidavit indicating other medical coverage. Employees shall be
     responsible to maintain proof of continuing insurance. Employees
     choosing not to participate in the School Board of Broward
     County’s health insurance program shall be reimbursed at a rate
     of seven hundred fifty dollars and no cents ($750) per year. Said


                               22-2
           premiums shall be deposited into the employee’s cafeteria plan in a
           manner consistent with the provisions of said plan. The parties
           mutually agree to discuss the opt-out plan as it pertains to
           premiums for other coverage.

     5.    During the clearance process, new employees shall be informed in
           writing of the date on which their health insurance becomes
           effective.

C.   Disability Insurance:   The Board shall provide without cost to each
     employee Disability Income Insurance in accordance with terms and
     benefits in effect.

D.   Liability Insurance: The Board shall provide Liability Insurance at no
     cost to employees in the amount of five hundred thousand ($500,000) for
     each employee in case of suit arising from or in the performance of the
     employee's duties.

E.   Annuity Programs: The Board shall make available to all employees
     through payroll deduction, tax deferred annuity programs with
     companies which qualify and are approved under guidelines and criteria
     established by the Board.

F.   Indemnity Insurance:         The Board agrees that any savings from
     experience on the dependent portion of the Board's indemnity insurance
     plan shall be used in a manner that will benefit dependents covered by
     the Board's health plan. Savings returned to the District form health
     care providers shall be reimbursed equally by cash payment to each
     employee electing dependent coverage from the insurance carrier
     producing the savings. Reimbursement shall be based proportionally on
     the total number of District employees enrolled in the plan.

G.   Rate Increase: Written notice of any rate increase in health and dental
     insurance for dependents coverage shall be provided to each employee
     within ten (10) days of the date the increase is made known to the Board.

H.   Employee Reimbursement:

     1.    Personal Property: If employees are attacked or assaulted or
           victim of theft or vandalism in the course of employment, the
           Board will insure or otherwise reimburse such employees for any
           loss, damage or destruction of clothing or personal property up to
           two hundred fifty dollars ($250) per employee per school year upon
           verification to the principal, unless the employee is otherwise
           reimbursed.



                                    22-3
     2.    Automobile Vandalism: If an employee's vehicle is damaged as a
           result of vandalism while on the property of a district school, the
           employee will be reimbursed for the damage not to exceed five
           hundred dollars ($500) when it is determined that the damage was
           caused on School Board property. Such determination may be
           made by either a School Resource Officer, a School Security
           Specialist, or an SIU investigator (as determined by the
           Superintendent), witness testimony or apprehension of the
           person(s) responsible for the damage. Reimbursement to affected
           individuals shall be in the amount of their automobile insurance
           deductible, not to exceed the maximum reimbursement of five
           hundred dollars ($500).

     3.    Any individual submitting a fraudulent claim under this provision
           shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including
           termination. The Board's maximum liability under this section is
           fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) per school year.

I.   Group Insurance Program:         Employees with a minimum of ten (10)
     years service with the Board retiring prior to Medicare eligibility may
     elect to remain in the Group Insurance Program until eligible for
     Medicare; rates applicable to the entire group; the cost of such insurance
     shall be borne by the retiree, except that the Board shall provide without
     charge for the collection and remittance of premiums for such insurance.
     Applications must be submitted within thirty (30) days of retirement.

J.   Cafeteria Insurance Program: The Board agrees to provide a cafeteria
     insurance program to all bargaining unit members including those on
     Board-approved paid leaves. Members on unpaid Board-approved leave
     are not eligible to participate in the program. The following criteria shall
     apply to the granting of cafeteria insurance benefits:

     1.    The Board will provide twenty-five dollars ($25) per month not to
           exceed three hundred dollars ($300) per employee per school year.
           Employees hired after the commencement of the school year, shall
           receive twenty-five dollars ($25) per month for each full month of
           employment.

     2.    The specific benefit components of the cafeteria program shall be
           contained in a booklet, which shall be distributed to all eligible
           unit members.

K.   The parties agree to eliminate enrollment in the fourth tier dependent
     rate which is identified in insurance documents as the "children (both
     spouses School Board employees employed in the same plan)" effective at
     the conclusion of the open enrollment period (November, 1994) for the


                                     22-4
1995 insurance plan year. Employees enrolled in the fourth tier prior to
the date indicated above may remain in this tier until the time their
employment with the School Board ends. Once all of the affected
employees have left the employment of the Board, the fourth tier shall be
eliminated.




                               22-5
                         ARTICLE TWENTY-THREE
                                LEAVES


A.   Sick Leave:

     Any employee employed on a full-time basis who is unable to perform
     his/her duty in the school because of illness, or because of illness or
     death of father, mother, sister, brother, husband, wife, child, other close
     relative, or member of his/her own household and consequently has to
     be absent from his/her work, shall be granted leave of absence for
     sickness by the Superintendent, or by someone designated in writing by
     him/her to do so. The following provisions shall govern sick leave:

     1.    Accrual: Each employee on a full-time basis shall be entitled to
           four (4) days of sick leave as of the first day of employment of each
           contract year, and shall thereafter earn one (1) day of sick leave for
           each month of employment, which shall be credited to the
           employee at the end of that month, and which shall not be used
           prior to the time it is earned and credited to the employee.
           However, the employee shall be entitled to earn no more than one
           (1) day of sick leave times the number of months of employment
           during the year of employment. When an employee uses a sick
           leave day, it shall be paid at the affected employee's daily rate of
           pay at the time the day is utilized. Also, when an employee uses a
           sick leave day, those days are earned at a lower rate of pay and
           shall be deducted before sick days having a higher value. Such
           leave shall be taken only when necessary because of sickness as
           herein prescribed. Such sick leave shall be cumulative from year
           to year. There shall be no limit on the number of days of sick leave
           an employee may accrue, except that at least one half of this
           cumulative leave must be established within the district.

           Sick leave accumulated in another Florida district or districts:
           by an employee shall be accrued to the employee at a rate equal to
           the number of sick leave days allowed the employee during each
           year of employment in this district until such time as all sick leave
           accumulated in other Florida districts has been transferred to the
           district.

           Such transferred sick leave days shall be in addition to sick leave
           days to which the employee is entitled from this school district.
           Employees who are to be temporarily absent from school for any
           reason shall, if possible, notify the principal or his/her designee at
           least two (2) hours prior to school opening.



                                     23-1
2.   Personal Reasons: Employees shall be granted up to six (6) days
     each school year for personal reasons. However, such absences for
     personal reasons shall be charged only to accrued sick leave, and
     leave for personal reasons shall be non-cumulative. Employees
     shall not be required to give reasons for personal leave, except that
     the leave is for "personal reasons."

     (a)   Personal reasons leave shall not be granted on the day
           preceding or following a holiday* nor during the first or last
           week of school. The first week of school starts on day one of
           the 196 day work calendar and the last week of school
           concludes on the final day of said calendar. *(Notes: A
           holiday on the official School Board calendar is any date
           marked as a "holiday" or "day off.")

3.   BEREAVEMENT LEAVE (SICK LEAVE)

     Any employee who suffers the death of an immediate family
     member shall be granted bereavement leave in the following
     manner:

     a.    If the funeral is to be held within 250 miles of the employee's
           home – the employee shall be allowed to utilize a maximum
           of four (4) days of sick leave for bereavement purposes.

     b.    If the funeral is to be held more than 250 miles from the
           employee's home – the employee shall be allowed to utilize a
           maximum of five (5) days of sick leave for bereavement
           purposes.

     c.    For the purposes of bereavement leave, an immediate family
           member shall be defined as the spouse, domestic cohabitant,
           child, stepchild, grandchild, mother, father, sister, brother,
           parents of domestic cohabitant, mother-in-law, father-in-law,
           grandmother, grandfather, daughter-in-law, son-in-law,
           brother-in-law,     sister-in-law, domestic      cohabitant’s
           sibling(s), grandparents of employee's spouse, grandparents
           of employee's domestic cohabitant, any other relative, or
           member of the employee's household. Proof of relationship
           to the deceased may be required.

     d.    The Board may require proof of death, within thirty (30) days
           after Bereavement Leave is taken. A copy of the newspaper
           obituary or the funeral card/program for the deceased are
           examples of acceptable proof of death.



                              23-2
     e.    Bereavement leave as outlined above shall not count against
           the employee's attendance for sick leave buy back purposes
           provided in Article 21, Section D. Nothing in this section
           shall be construed to limit an employee’s right to use sick
           leave under provisions of Section A above.

4.   Use of Sick Leave: An employee shall have the right to use sick
     leave in one-half day or full-day units, for the purpose of medical
     or dental appointments.

     If an immediate supervisor suspects an abuse of sick leave, he or
     she shall first investigate the matter and discuss the findings with
     the affected employee.

     An abuse of sick leave is defined as a pattern or series of absences
     which occur over an extended period of time and on a regular and
     predictable basis and without adequate justification. For example
     a regular and predictable basis would be: sick leave being used as
     soon as earned; absence on only Mondays or Fridays; absences
     occurring on the days before or after a holiday period; absences
     occurring on the day after a payday on a regular basis.

     If the investigation sustains that a documented pattern of abuse
     does exist the employee may be subject to disciplinary action as
     per Article 18 section B (1).

5.   Terminal Pay:      Any employee at normal retirement or his/her
     beneficiary if service is terminated by death, shall be provided
     terminal pay. Such terminal pay shall not exceed an amount
     determined as follows:

     (a)   During the first three (3) years of service:

           1.    The affected employee's daily rate of pay on July 1,
                 1994, multiplied by 35 percent multiplied by the
                 number of unused sick leave days held on July 1,
                 1994.

           2.    The affected employee's daily rate of pay at the time
                 sick leave is earned times 35 percent times the
                 number of days of accumulated sick leave earned after
                 July 1, 1994.

     (b)   During the fourth (4th) through sixth (6th) years of service:




                               23-3
      1.    The affected employee's daily rate of pay on July 1,
            1994, multiplied by 40 percent multiplied by the
            number of unused sick leave days held on July 1,
            1994.

      2.    The affected employee's daily rate of pay at the time
            sick leave* is earned multiplied by 40 percent
            multiplied by the number of days of accumulated sick
            leave earned after July 1, 1994.

(c)   During the seventh (7th) through ninth (9th) years of service:

      1.    The affected employee's daily rate of pay on July 1,
            1994, multiplied by 45 percent multiplied by the
            number of unused sick leave days held on July 1,
            1994.

      2.    The affected employee's daily rate of pay at the time
            sick leave* is earned multiplied by 45 percent
            multiplied by the number of days of accumulated sick
            leave earned after July 1, 1994.

(d)   During the tenth (10th) through the twelfth (12th) year of
      service:

      1.    The affected employee's daily rate of pay on July 1,
            1994, multiplied by 50 percent multiplied by the
            number of unused sick leave days held on July 1,
            1994.

      2.    The affected employee's daily rate of pay at the time
            sick leave* is earned multiplied by 50 percent
            multiplied by the number of days of accumulated sick
            leave earned after July 1, 1994.

(e)   During and after the thirteenth (13th) year of service:

      1.    The affected employee's daily rate of pay on July 1,
            1994, multiplied by the number of unused sick leave
            days held on July 1, 1994.

      2.    The affected employee's daily rate of pay at the time
            sick leave is earned* multiplied by the number of days
            of accumulated sick leave earned after July 1, 1994.




                         23-4
                       Employees who are granted an early retirement under
                       the Board's program are eligible to receive the benefits
                       outlined above if the employee meets the criteria
                       contained in this section.

           (f)   No employee who meets the eligibility requirements listed
                 above may receive any compensation for sick leave payments
                 unless they sign and execute the Payment of Sick Leave
                 Upon Retirement Agreement provided by the Superintendent.
                 This Agreement requires the retiring Board employee to seek,
                 accept, and cash the first retirement benefit check issued by
                 the Florida Retirement System.

                 The employee must qualify for "normal retirement" which
                 under this policy shall mean retirement under plan
                 A,B,C,D,E under the Florida Retirement System or any other
                 plan established by the Legislature with either full or
                 reduced benefits as provided by law. Normal retirement
                 shall not be interpreted to include disability retirement.

                 *Note: "At the time sick leave is earned" shall be interpreted
                 to mean the value of sick leave at the end of each school year
                 or at the time the affected employee retires, whichever comes
                 first.

B.   Illness-In-Line-of-Duty:       Any permanent full-time employee shall be
     entitled to illness-in-line-of-duty leave with pay when he/she has to be
     absent from his/her duties because of a personal injury received in the
     discharge of duty or because of illness from any contagious or infectious
     disease contracted in school work. Such leave shall be in addition to any
     other leave to which the employee may be entitled and such leave shall
     not be cumulative. Each employee shall be entitled to a maximum of
     thirty-five (35) days of such leave. Paid holidays occurring during such
     leave shall not be included in the computation of the number of days
     with respect to which such leave is applicable, provided that the
     employee shall be paid for such paid holidays.          A substantiating
     statement by a physician and a corroborating statement of the immediate
     supervisor may be subject to the grievance procedure.

C.   Verification of Leave: An employee shall, before claiming and receiving
     compensation for the time absent from his/her duties, while absent
     because of leave as prescribed in A and B, make and file on a Board form
     by the end of the school month following his/her return from such
     absence, with the Superintendent or designee, a written certificate which
     shall set forth the day or days absent, that such absence was necessary
     and that he/she is entitled to receive pay for such absence in accordance


                                    23-5
     with provisions set forth above. The Superintendent may, at his/her
     option, require a certificate of illness from a licensed physician or from
     the county health officer.

D.   Sabbatical Leave

     1.    The Board will award up to thirty (30) sabbatical leaves per school
           year to applicants who will use said leave for the purpose of
           obtaining certification in an area in which the Board determines
           that a shortage of employees is developing.

     2.    The Board will develop each school year a list of certification areas
           in which a shortage of employees is developing.

     3.    Applications for sabbatical leave will be screened by a Committee
           of six (6) members.      Three (3) members of the Sabbatical
           Committee are to be appointed by the President of the BTU, and
           three (3) members are to be appointed by the Superintendent.

     4.    An applicant must agree to pursue a plan approved by the
           Committee and leading to certification in an area in which a
           shortage of employees is developing.

     5.    The applicant must provide a written recommendation from
           his/her principal, department head and the affected curriculum
           supervisor.

     6.    Seniority shall not be a factor in awarding critical shortage
           sabbaticals.

     7.    An application for sabbatical leave shall be submitted to the
           Superintendent not later than March 1st (or the last workday
           preceding March 1st) preceding the school year for which the leave
           is sought.

           However, this deadline may be extended by mutual agreement
           between the parties. If the Committee requests clarification of an
           application, the Committee will inform the applicant of the time
           limit for supplying the information.

     8.    The Superintendent will give written notice not later than the
           second Board meeting in April to each applicant regarding the
           disposition of the employee's application.

     9.    An employee granted a sabbatical leave shall inform the
           Superintendent in writing of his/her intention to either accept or


                                    23-6
      decline such leave. Such notification shall be given not later than
      fifteen (15) days after the applicant has received notice of approval
      for leave.

10.   If more critical shortage sabbatical applications are received than
      the projected number of critical shortage vacancies for a critical
      shortage subject area, then the applicants shall be rank-ordered by
      critical shortage subject area based upon the Sabbatical
      Committee ratings. The sabbatical vacancies shall be offered to
      the applicants in order from the highest to the lowest ranking
      applicant in a subject area until all projected critical shortage area
      vacancies are filled or the maximum of thirty (30) sabbaticals are
      offered.   Should any of the original choices decline his/her
      sabbatical leave due to a change in plan or lack of acceptance in a
      program, the next ranked applicant in that critical shortage
      subject area shall be notified and considered. This process shall
      continue through the list of alternate-designates until all approved
      applications have been accepted or rejected.

11.   There shall be separate application forms for sabbatical leave and
      tuition reimbursements under this provision.

12.   The Sabbatical Committee is hereby authorized by the parties to
      issue a recommendation to the President of the Broward Teachers
      Union and the Associate Superintendent of Human Resources who
      are authorized to reach a final agreement on the procedures that
      will be printed and distributed to all work locations and will
      become part of this Agreement.

13.   Employees granted critical shortage sabbaticals shall receive
      seventy-five percent (75%) of their base salary while on said leave.

14.   Employees who are granted this leave shall agree in writing to
      teach in the district for three (3) years after returning from said
      leave.

15.   The period of such leave shall count as regular service for the
      purpose of retirement, if approved in advance by the retirement
      system, and the contribution to the appropriate retirement system
      therefore shall continue.      The employee's insurance benefits
      normally paid by the Board and provided in this Agreement will be
      paid by the Board while the employee is on sabbatical leave. The
      leave shall count for purpose of salary increments but such
      increments shall not be applied retroactively. The leave shall not
      count for vacation or sick leave.



                                23-7
16.   An employee who returns from completion of a critical shortage
      sabbatical shall be placed in a position requiring the certification
      earned by the employee while they were on said leave provided that
      such a position exists in the district.

      If no position exists, the district shall employee the person in
      another position for which he/she is qualified until a vacancy in
      the critical shortage area is announced.

17.   Teacher Directed Improvement Fund (TDIF)

      a)    The parties agree to create a TDIF for the purpose of
            designing and recommending a procedure for awarding
            special grants to bargaining unit members.                 The
            Superintendent and the President of the BTU shall each
            select three (3) representatives to serve on the Committee.

      b)    The funding for the Grants shall be $1,514,248 annually,
            except that such funding shall be suspended for the 2011-
            2012 school year. All unspent funds shall be carried over to
            the following fiscal year. Up to $42,500 shall be deducted
            from the TDIF fund to pay for up to one-half the
            administrative costs associated with this program. It is the
            intent of the parties to notify applicants of the disposition of
            their grant applications within 65 days after the close of the
            application period. This program shall be administered by
            the Division of Human Resources.

      c)    Examples of items which might be considered for special
            grants include differential staffing programs, research
            projects to strengthen curriculum, career ladder stipends,
            attendance at a center for creative learning, etc.

      d)    The Committee is hereby authorized by the parties to issue a
            recommendation to the President of the Broward Teachers
            Union and the Associate Superintendent of Human
            Resources who are authorized to reach a final agreement on
            the procedures which will be printed and distributed to all
            work locations and will become part of this Agreement.

      e)    Teachers with a minimum of five (5) consecutive years of
            satisfactory service for the SBBC may apply for workshop
            and conference reimbursement to a maximum of $1,000 per
            teacher. The WCCI applications will be divided into three (3)
            groups. Group A will consist of teachers with 5-13 years of
            continuous experience in the teachers’ bargaining unit.


                               23-8
                Group B will consist of teachers with 14-21 years of
                continuous experience in the teachers’ bargaining unit.
                Group C will consist of teachers with 22 or more years of
                continuous experience in the teachers’ bargaining unit. The
                available funds for WCCI-TDIF applications will be allocated
                according to the following – Group A will receive 25% of the
                available funds, Group B will receive 35% of available funds
                and Group C will receive 40% of available funds.

                The applicants chosen will alternate every other year (within
                each group) from highest to lowest seniority, and then lowest
                to highest seniority to make the process more equitable for
                teachers at all levels. In school years beginning in odd
                numbered years, the most seniored teachers within the
                group will have priority, in school years beginning in even
                numbered years, the least seniored teachers within the
                group will have priority. Funding will be awarded in the
                manner commencing in the 2010-2011 school year.

                The TDIF Committee shall also establish rules and
                regulations applicable to tuition reimbursements and school
                education projects. If a teacher does not intent to use the
                TDIF funding, they must notify Human Resources (TDIF) by
                March 1 of any given year. Failure to notify will result in the
                teacher being ineligible for any TDIF funds for two (2) years.

E.   Temporary Duty Leave: Temporary duty leave may be granted to
     employees by the principal or supervisor equivalent in rank for the
     purpose of:

     1.   Attending and/or participating in professional meetings relating to
          educational workshops, seminars or conferences sponsored by
          professional organizations, colleges, universities or government or
          private agencies concerned with public school matters.

     2.   Visitation for the purpose of observing instructional techniques or
          programs.

     3.   The principal agrees to provide funds for normal expenses for
          professional leaves up to the limits provided by Board policy. It is
          understood that normally only one member of a department may
          attend any one such meeting at school expense.                 The
          Superintendent may approve of exceptions.




                                   23-9
     4.    Employees approved for TDIF grants shall be approved for
           temporary duty leave so long as all costs, including substitute
           costs associated with the leave are paid through the grant.

F.   Legal Commitments:         Employees shall be granted leave for legal
     commitments and shall receive their regular salary while serving as
     jurors or witnesses under subpoena.

G.   Professional Leave to Attend Summer School: shall be granted when
     students are not in session to any employee required to be absent at the
     beginning or end of a school year, in order to attend a full-time course of
     summer study. Such leave shall be without loss of pay and shall be
     limited to three (3) days at the end of a school term, and three (3) days at
     the beginning of a school term, provided that a maximum of three (3)
     days shall be granted in any one (1) school year. The principal shall
     certify that the absence of the employee will not interfere seriously with
     the employee's contractual obligations or jeopardize the accreditation of
     the school.

H.   Military Reserve Leave

     1.    Any employee who is a member of a national military reserve unit
           or National Guard shall be allowed up to seventeen (17) days of
           leave without loss of pay or other accumulated leave when ordered
           to active duty by the appropriate unit during regular term. At the
           Board’s discretion, the leave period may be extended up to thirty
           (30) days.     An employee required to report for a physical
           examination under any selective service law shall be granted leave
           without loss of pay or other accumulated leave for the time
           required for this obligation.

     2.    Employees who are reservists called to active duty shall receive pay
           to supplement their military pay in the amount necessary to bring
           their base salary, inclusive of their base military pay, to the level
           earned at the time they were called to active duty. Base salary
           shall be defined as the employee’s main job with the School Board.

     3.    Employees on active duty shall be eligible to continue their School
           Board health insurance coverage by paying the employee’s share of
           any cost of such coverage.

     4.    During the period of leave required by the call-up, the employee
           shall continue to maintain his/her seniority and shall accrue sick
           leave.




                                    23-10
     5.    Upon returning from leave, the employee shall receive experience
           credit on the salary schedule for the time spent on active duty in
           the military call-up and shall be returned to employment to their
           school/work site prior to the active military leave.

     6.    The terms of this agreement shall be in effect during the period of
           time established by the School Board when a military call-up is in
           effect and shall expire at its conclusion.

I.   Active Military Service Status: Any employee required or volunteering
     to serve in the Armed Forces of the United States shall be granted leave
     without pay for such service.

     An employee returning from such leave shall be returned to employment,
     without prejudice, provided application for reemployment is filed within
     six (6) months following the date of discharge or release from active
     military duty, and provided further that the School Board shall have up
     to six (6) months to reassign the employee to duty in the school system.
     Military leave shall not count as years of service toward a continuing
     contract or a professional service contract.

J.   A Leave Of Absence For Professional Improvement: without salary,
     shall be authorized for any continuing contract employee, upon
     application, for a minimum of one (1) school year. Upon approval of the
     Superintendent and Board, a leave of shorter duration may be granted
     for the purpose of (1) engaging in study at an accredited university; (2)
     full-time participation in federally sponsored volunteer programs; (3) full-
     time teaching in foreign or military programs; (4) cultural travel or work
     program related to professional responsibilities; or (5) participating in
     exchange teaching programs in other territories or countries.

     Applications for Professional Improvement Leave: shall be submitted
     to the Superintendent not later than sixty (60) days prior to the start of
     the year in which leave is to commence. Experience credit on the salary
     schedule in the amount authorized in the leave shall be granted upon the
     employee's return from the leave for purposes J (3) and J (5) above.
     Upon return from such leave, the employee shall be returned to his/her
     former position or to a substantially similar position, for which the
     employee is fully qualified.

K.   A Personal or Maternity Leave without pay and not to exceed three (3)
     years shall be granted to an employee for the purpose of childbearing
     and/or child rearing and/or child care as follows:




                                    23-11
     1.    An employee may continue to be actively employed during
           pregnancy only so long as the employee is properly able to perform
           required teaching functions.

     2.    All or any portion of a leave taken by an employee because of
           medical disability connected with or resulting from the pregnancy
           may, at the employee's option, be charged to the employee's
           available sick leave.

     3.    An employee shall be entitled, upon request, to personal leave to
           begin at any time between the birth of the child and up to two (2)
           years thereafter.

L.   Continuing Insurance Coverage While On Leave:              Any employee
     granted a Board-approved leave of absence with or without pay as
     provided in this Article shall be given the opportunity, unless otherwise
     provided, to continue insurance coverage’s in existing school programs
     and, with the approval of the retirement system, continue participation
     in the retirement system during the leave, provided that the premiums
     for such insurance programs shall be paid by the employee on a monthly
     basis in advance of the month due. Any such employee may serve as a
     substitute teacher in the district while on leave.

     Teaching Position While On Leave: An employee may be employed in
     a teaching position outside of the district while on leave if there are
     unusual circumstances to warrant the job as determined by the
     Superintendent. Such approval must be obtained in writing prior to
     taking the leave. Examples of unusual circumstances would be moving
     to another state to take care of a sick family member or a spouse
     transferred to another area by his/her company. The Superintendent
     can require the affected employee to provide documentation verifying the
     unusual circumstances.

     Also, employees who are on any Board approved unpaid leave of absence
     are authorized to work in a temporary, part-time capacity with the
     district. Said employees may apply for such positions, and if selected by
     the district, will be allowed to work.

M.   Length of Leave: An employee holding a continuing contract may be
     granted upon request, personal leave without pay for a period not to
     exceed two (2) years for reasons not provided elsewhere in this
     Agreement. The employee shall be returned to duty at the beginning of
     the next school year following the leave. Such leave shall require the
     approval of the Superintendent.




                                   23-12
     Returning Early From Leave: If an employee notifies the
     Superintendent of the desire to return to active employment before the
     expiration of such leave, the District shall place the employee in a vacant
     position within their choice of certification and geographic area. If the
     affected employee is offered a position by the district and he/she rejects
     said position, then he/she may not return to work until the expiration of
     the approved leave.

N.   Elected to Public Office:          Bargaining unit members holding a
     continuing contract who are elected to a public office in the State of
     Florida may be granted a non-paid leave of absence for the length of the
     term of office. If the affected employee notifies the Superintendent of a
     desire to return to employment before the expiration of such leave, said
     employee may be returned to duty to a position for which he/she
     qualifies. The employee shall be returned to duty at the beginning of the
     school year following the leave to a position for which he/she qualified.

O.   Board Determination: All leaves granted at the request of an employee
     shall be for particular purposes or causes. The Board shall have the
     right to determine that the leave is used for the purposes or causes set
     forth in the application, and if not so used, the Board may cancel the
     leave, provided, however, that verification of use of personal reasons
     leave shall be as provided in A (2) above.

P.   Replacement Teacher: Employees returning from any leave granted by
     the district shall not be guaranteed the same work location or
     assignment. However, any employee filling the position of an employee
     on leave for one (1) year or less who has been promised the same position
     upon return from leave shall be given written notice at the time of
     employment that his/her position will no longer be available when the
     leave expires.

     Such employee shall be considered a replacement teacher and shall not
     be entitled to the guaranteed re-employment provisions afforded to
     annual contract teachers as contained in Article Eighteen, Sections C
     and D of the contract.

Q.   Accrued Annual Leave: Employees employed on a twelve (12) month
     work calendar shall accrue annual leave (paid vacation) at a rate of one
     (1) day per month for employees during the first five (5) years of
     employment; one and one-fourth (1 1/4) days per month for employees
     during the sixth (6th through ninth (9th) years of employment; and one
     and one-half (1 1/2) days per month for employees during and beyond
     the tenth (10th) year of employment.




                                    23-13
R.   Sick Leave Bank

     The parties mutually agree to establish a sick leave bank (hereafter
     referred to as the bank) for employees. Participation in the bank shall be
     voluntary. The bank shall be made operational as soon after the
     ratification of this contract as possible. The bank shall be governed by
     the following procedures:

     1.    Creation of the Bank: The bank will be established providing that
           one thousand (1000) days have been deposited (one [1] per full-
           time employee), during an enrollment period extending thirty (30)
           calendar days from the date such enrollment period is announced
           to employees. Subsequently, employees may enroll in the bank
           only within thirty (30) calendar days of the beginning of the official
           school year.

     2.    Membership Requirements: Full-time employees who have been
           employed full time for at least one (1) full year, and who have sick
           leave accrual of ten (10) days at the time of enrollment may enroll
           in the sick leave bank by contributing one (1) day of sick leave to
           the bank. At the time of the contribution, the sick leave day shall
           be converted to a monetary sum by multiplying the day donated
           times the donor's daily rate of pay when contributed.

     3.    Sick Leave Bank Committee: The Committee shall be appointed
           by the BTU for the purpose of administering the sick leave bank.
           The Committee shall:

           (a)   Maintain adequate records relative to all functions of the
                 bank.

           (b)   Meet periodically, as requested by the Superintendent, with
                 a designated administrator of the county to review BTU sick
                 leave bank records.

           (c)   Operate the bank in accordance with rules and procedures
                 mutually agreed to by the parties.             However, the
                 Superintendent shall establish and the BTU will comply with
                 procedures for identifying and recording contributions to and
                 withdrawals from the bank.

                 The parties authorize the Committee to establish additional
                 administrative procedures necessary for the operation of the
                 bank as long as said procedures are consistent with and do
                 not change any of the criteria contained in Section R of this
                 Article.


                                    23-14
     (d)   Not grant more sick leave days than are available in the
           bank.

4.   Withdrawal Rights and Procedures: Participating bank members
     may request sick leave days from the bank within the following
     limitations:

     (a)   A withdrawal may be approved only upon the total depletion
           of the respective employee's accumulated sick leave and
           vacation leave. In addition, the affected employee must have
           exhausted or be ineligible for any type of leave granted by the
           Board related to the accident, illness or injury, including but
           not limited to leave granted for disability or for illness or
           injury on the job.

     (b)   The maximum withdrawal for any employee for one (1)
           illness or injury or complications thereof shall be fifty (50)
           days.

     (c)   An employee may apply to the Committee for a withdrawal in
           advance of the depletion of such employee's accumulated
           sick leave, to be granted, if needed, upon such depletion.
           However, applications must be made no later than ten (10)
           working days after the participant returns to work.

     (d)   Withdrawals shall be in full day units and must be for
           catastrophic illnesses or injuries that extend for a minimum
           of eight (8) consecutive days. Withdrawals for absences that
           extend beyond thirty (30) days shall not be granted if the
           employee is receiving disability benefits nor shall it be
           granted for absences for which the employee is being
           reimbursed for loss of wages under an individual insurance
           policy.

     (e)   All applications for withdrawal shall be in writing and shall
           be verified by the Committee. The Committee may submit a
           request     to    the    Superintendent    concerning    the
           implementation of Article Twenty-Three, Section C of this
           Agreement.

     (f)   The salary of a teacher participating in the bank will be
           reduced by any benefits drawn from Worker's Compensation.

     (g)   When days are awarded from the bank, they will be
           withdrawn at the receiving party's daily rate of pay.


                              23-15
     (h)   The Committee may request the Superintendent to request a
           second medical opinion from the applicant at his/her
           expense.

     (i)   Withdrawals shall be granted only for the illness, accident or
           injury of the bank participant.

     (j)   The bank may not be used for elective surgery which can be
           planned to occur during non-work time. The question of
           elective or necessary surgery shall be determined by the
           physician in charge. A second doctor's diagnosis may be
           required, at participant's expense.

5.   Maintenance of the Bank

     (a)   Once the bank is established, there shall be no requirement
           for an employee to replace sick leave days withdrawn from
           the sick leave bank, except as equally required of all other
           participating employees. If the bank is depleted to a point
           where only seventeen thousand dollars ($17,000) remains,
           all members of the bank shall contribute one (1) day each
           time the bank is depleted to this level.

     (b)   A participating employee who chooses to no longer
           participate in the sick leave bank shall not be allowed to
           withdraw any sick leave already contributed to the sick leave
           bank.


6.   Duration:
     The sick leave bank shall remain in existence for the duration of
     this contract and may be renewed in succeeding contracts.

7.   Indemnification: The BTU and members of the bargaining unit
     shall indemnify and hold the Board and all administrators
     harmless against any and all claims, demands, suits, or other
     forms of liability and all court costs arising out of the application of
     the provisions of this section.

8.   Eligibility:
     (a)   Board produced eligibility forms should be sent to only those
           not in the sick leave bank, when additional members are
           sought for initial enrollment.




                               23-16
          (b)   The Board shall send to the BTU a complete list of eligible
                employees by the end of the first pay period in October.

          (c)   The Board shall notify the BTU of new enrollees within thirty
                (30) calendar days of the close of open enrollment.

          (d)   The Board shall send to the BTU an updated Sick Leave
                balance statement on a regular basis.

S.   Family and Medical Leave: The Board will provide family and medical
     leave for qualified employees pursuant to the provisions of the Family
     and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993. The parties agree that the
     provisions outlined below are the eligibility standards for the FMLA.

     1.   A leave of absence under this policy for a full-time employee shall
          be granted for a total of twelve (12) work weeks during any school
          year (July - June) for one of the following reasons:

          a.    birth of a son or daughter of the employee and in order to
                care for such son or daughter.

          b.    placement of a son or daughter with the employee for
                adoption or foster care.

          c.    care for the spouse, or a son, daughter, or parent, of the
                employee, if such spouse, son, daughter, or parent, has a
                serious health condition.

          d.    a serious health condition that makes the employee unable
                to perform the functions of the position of such employee.

     2.   For purposes of this policy, an "eligible employee" means an
          employee who has been employed:

          a.    for at least twelve months by the Board;

                                    and

          b.    for at least 784 hours of service with the Board during the
                previous twelve month (July-June) period.

     3.   Employees who are part-time unit members (not less than four [4]
          hours per day) shall be eligible for a pro-rata amount of twelve (12)
          weeks of leave. For example, an employee who is sixty (60) percent
          of full-time is eligible for 7.2 weeks of leave or 36 days.



                                   23-17
     4.    If both a husband and wife are employed by the Board, the
           aggregate number of workweeks of leave to which both may be
           entitled is twelve (12) workweeks.

     5.    Employees who are on leave granted under this policy who are
           eligible and receive Board provided group health insurance when
           actively working for the Board shall maintain this coverage for the
           duration of such leave.      Employees who pay for dependent
           insurance and other types of Board offered insurance coverage
           must make arrangements before going on leave or in emergency
           situations, as soon as possible thereafter, to make direct premium
           payments to the Board while on leave to continue this coverage.

     6.    Family leave as outlined in number one above, subsections a & b
           above shall not be taken intermittently. The affected employee
           must take a minimum of four (4) weeks of leave.

     7.    Medical leave as outlined in number one above, subsections c & d
           may be taken intermittently when medically necessary. Under such
           circumstances, the employee must try to schedule the leave so as
           not to unduly disrupt the employer's operations.       Also, the
           Superintendent may place the employee in an alternative position
           which better accommodates intermittent leave.

     8.    The Board shall require a medical certification from eligible
           employees who request medical leave under the FMLA. The form
           will be provided by the Superintendent and the completed form
           must be returned within five (5) working days. This deadline may
           be extended in unusual circumstances as determined by the
           Superintendent.

     9.    This leave may be taken before or after utilizing any other leave
           provisions to which the employee is entitled to under the
           provisions of this contract.

T.   Americans with Disabilities Act:       The Board shall comply with the
     Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). The Americans with Disabilities
     Act of 1990 provides that no qualified individual with a disability shall,
     by reason of such disability, be excluded from participation in or be
     denied the benefits of the services, programs, or activities of the School
     Board, or be subjected to discrimination or harassment.

     Discrimination Complaints: Any employee who believes he/she has
     been discriminated against, denied a benefit, or excluded from
     participation in any School Board education program or activity, on the



                                   23-18
     basis of disability in violation of ADA, may file a complaint with the Office
     of Equal Educational Opportunities.

U.   Professional Sabbatical Leave

     1.    Eligibility Requirements

           a.    Full-time bargaining unit members who are in an active pay
                 status (not on leave) with an IPAS evaluation score of
                 satisfactory, hold a current professional certificate, have a
                 minimum of five (5) creditable years with the Board, and are
                 on Step 10 or above prior to the effective date of the
                 Professional Sabbatical Leave. The leave will be for a full
                 school year. An employee is only eligible for one (1) such
                 leave during their career with the Board.

     2.    Requirement While On Leave:

           a.    The employee must undertake an activity that will be
                 beneficial to him/herself, and the school district. Applicants
                 must be pre-approved for the leave. Acceptable projects
                 during said leave include, but are not limited to:

                 1.     perform community services.
                 2.     serve as a School Board volunteer.
                 3.     conduct educational academic research on a pre-
                        approved topic. If this option is selected, the employee
                        must provide the Board with a research report.
                 4.     teach undergraduate or graduate classes.
                 5.     to learn a second language.
                 6.     to upgrade related vocational skills.

     3.    Benefits

           a.    Teachers on this leave will be paid $5,000 per year equal
                 monthly installments of $500 (less FICA and withholding
                 taxes) for an employee on a full school year calendar for ten
                 (10) months. The Board will pay retirement contributions on
                 these payments. The payment of said amounts shall be in
                 accordance with the provisions of Article 19, Section n of this
                 agreement. Employees working less than full time shall
                 receive a pro-rata share of the $5,000. The Board will pay
                 retirement contributions on these payments.

           b.    The affected teacher may retire at the conclusion of this
                 leave or may elect, upon return from such leave, to make


                                     23-19
                 additional retirement contributions and receive retirement
                 credit for the leave period, based on the full salary earned
                 prior to the leave of absence. If additional contributions are
                 not made, only the employee's sabbatical pay shall be used
                 should such period be included in the employee's average
                 final compensation.

           c.    Professional Sabbatical Leave recipients will continue to
                 receive Board paid insurance benefits equal in value to what
                 the employee would have if not on leave.

     4.    Application Procedures:

           a.    Employees must apply for the leave not later than June 14th
                 of each year.

           b.    This leave is irrevocable and the employee may not return to
                 work prior to the conclusion of the leave.

     5.    This program shall automatically expire at the end of this contract
           and may only be continued by mutual written agreement between
           the School Board and the Broward Teachers Union.

V.   Donation of Sick Leave to a Family Member: An employee may donate
     to or receive from a qualified member of his/her family who is a district
     employee earned and accrued sick leave in accordance with the following
     procedures:

     1.    Qualified family member is defined as a spouse, child, parent,
           sibling who is also employed by the Board.

     2.    Days/time may not be donated until such time as the recipient has
           depleted his/her own sick leave and vacation accrual, excluding
           sick leave from a sick leave pool in which he/she is a participant.

     3.    Donated days/time shall have no value for the purpose of terminal
           pay or any other program and/or provision that provides pay for
           accrued sick leave.

     4.    Donated days/time shall not be utilized for the purpose of personal
           reasons leave nor shall it be utilized for purpose of meeting
           requirements for membership in the Sick Leave Bank.

     5.    Donated days/time shall not disqualify the donor from eligibility
           for incentive awards under Article 21.



                                   23-20
     6.   Employees shall comply with procedures contained in School
          Board policy for the donation of sick leave to a family member
          regarding the exchange of sick leave, the calculation of payments,
          notification requirements, and other matters not covered in this
          section.

W.   Declared Emergency Paid Leave:

     1.   A declared emergency is defined as one declared by federal, state,
          or local officials.

     2.   Employees may receive Declared Emergency Paid Leave when one
          or more of the following conditions exist:

          a.    The Superintendent or designee is authorized to declare that
                an emergency event exists for which said leave is available.

          b.    The employee is unable to return to work due to required
                evacuation.

          c.    The employee sustains personal injury or significant damage
                to their personal residence.

          d.    The employee is needed to assist a family member with a
                storm related health emergency.

          e.    The employee is required to participate in relief efforts.

          f.    The employee’s personal involvement is required for other
                emergency related circumstances.

     3.   Requests for leave must be recommended by the authorized
          supervisor for approval by the Superintendent or designee.

     4.   The employee may be required to provide documentation of the
          condition(s) in subsection 1 above for which leave is requested.

     5.   Declared Emergency Paid Leave shall not exceed ten (10) days per
          declared   emergency   event   unless     authorized    by   the
          Superintendent.

     6.   Declared Emergency Paid Leave shall not be deducted from the
          employee’s accrued leave.




                                   23-21
                    ARTICLE TWENTY-FOUR
                EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM


A.   Establishment: The Board and the BTU recognize the necessity
     for identifying, developing, promoting and promulgating sound
     physical and mental health and developing prevention and
     correction programs for bargaining unit members. As a result of
     this awareness, and at the request of the BTU, the School Board
     has established an Employee Assistance Program.

B.   Purpose: The basic elements of this program may include:

     (a)   referring troubled employees to community resources for
           counsel or treatment.

     (b)   developing programs for stress reduction.

     (c)   developing procedures for identification and referral of
           employees in need of assistance.

C.   Committee Composition:       The BTU shall designate two (2)
     members to an "Employee Assistance Program" Committee. The
     Superintendent shall appoint two (2) members. The Committee
     shall make recommendations to the Superintendent and the
     President of the Broward Teachers Union concerning program
     procedures and services.

D.   Enrollment: Any employee who desires to enroll in the Employee
     Assistance Program or is recommended for enrollment must
     submit a request to the program coordinator.

E.   Special Leave: Such employees who have depleted all of their
     available sick leave must request a special unpaid leave of absence
     from the Board not to exceed one (1) year.          The term and
     conditions of the leave shall be determined by the Board.

F.   Drug Free Workplace

     1.    The Board and the BTU recognize that substance abuse in
           our nation and our community exacts staggering costs in
           both human economic terms. The Board and BTU share a
           commitment to maintain a drug-free work place.




                                 24-1
2.   Reasonable suspicion testing requires authorization of the
     Director of Risk Management or the Executive Director of
     Professional   Standards.         Administrators requesting
     reasonable suspicion drug tests shall be trained and
     competent in the recognition or drug/alcohol abuse.
     Circumstances under which testing may be considered
     include, but are not limited to, the following:

     a.   observed use of illegal drugs and/or abuse of alcohol
          during work hours
     b.   apparent physical state of impairment of motor
          functions
     c.   marked changes in personal behavior on the job not
          attributable to other factors
     d.   employee involvement in serious or repetitive accidents
          on the job, causing personal injury to self or others
          and/or significant property damage.

3.   Drug and/or alcohol testing shall be conducted by Board
     approved, independent, certified laboratories utilizing
     recognized techniques and procedures, as described in the
     School Board of Broward County “Reasonable Suspicion
     Drug Testing” procedures, which is incorporated by reference
     into this contract, and made part thereof.

4.   Employees subject to drug testing procedures shall be
     treated in a respectful and confidential manner. Employees
     shall be informed of the intention to require a drug/alcohol
     test and the basis upon which the test is being required.
     Employees shall have the right to consult with a
     representative of the BTU, provided it does not delay the
     testing process unreasonably, and shall be informed of this
     right prior to submitting to a testing request. Employees
     shall not be required to pay for any drug tests required by
     the Board.

5.   Employees who test positive for the first time shall be
     referred to EAP. Successful completion of a recommended
     program may mitigate any recommended disciplinary action.

6.   All information received or produced as a result of a drug
     testing program are to be treated as confidential to the
     extent possible under provisions of state and federal law.




                          24-2
                         ARTICLE TWENTY-FIVE
                       REASSIGNMENT & TRANSFER


It is the intent of the parties to provide staff stability and opportunities for
reassignment and transfers. The following procedures shall be utilized to
achieve this objective:

A.    Reassignment

      1.    A reassignment is defined as a change in grade level or subject
            assignment; or, in the case of a teacher assigned to a center, area,
            or off campus facility, a change in any position under the direction
            and supervision of a principal regardless of site location.

      2.    Employees who desire to be reassigned shall file a written
            statement with his/her school principal of such desire. Voluntary
            requests for reassignment shall receive first consideration to the
            extent that vacancies exist within the building/location.

      3.    Involuntary reassignments shall be made at the discretion of the
            principal provided the authority is exercised in a professional and
            fair manner; not arbitrary or capricious. The principal shall advise
            the employee through a personal interview that a reassignment is
            being recommended and the reasons therefore.

      4.    (a) An employee with a complaint about being unfairly reassigned
            in an arbitrary and capricious manner may present the complaint
            to his/her principal.

            (b) If the principal is unable to resolve the complaint the employee
            may present the complaint to the Area Superintendent for review.

            (c) If the Area Superintendent is unable to resolve the complaint,
            the Superintendent of Schools and the President of the BTU will
            meet periodically to jointly resolve the unresolved complaints. The
            resolution at this level is final and binding and shall not be further
            challenged under Article 34 of the contract.

      5.    Employees receiving an involuntary reassignment during the
            school year shall receive three (3) non-assigned preparation days
            prior to the start of the involuntary assignment.




                                      25-1
B.   Transfers

     1.   A transfer is defined as a permanent (more than one semester)
          change in the school, center, off-campus facility or other location
          at which the employee is regularly assigned. For purposes of this
          section a main building, any annex building(s), or portable
          classrooms shall be deemed to be part of the same school, center
          or off-campus facility irrespective of physical location provided that
          all such facilities have the same administrator.

          For Psychologists, Social Workers, Visiting Teacher, and other
          such employees who are assigned to an area (i.e. North, South,
          etc.), a transfer is defined as a change in the area.

          Reassignment as defined in Article 25-A(1) shall not constitute a
          transfer for the purposes of this agreement.

     2.   A transfer for an employee who is assigned to work in a program or
          activity which regularly or occasionally requires performing work at
          more than one school, center, off-campus facility or other location
          (e.g. store front schools or detention facilities) shall be deemed to
          occur only when the employee is moved to a program or activity
          which is under the supervision of a different principal or
          administrator.

     3.   The parties agree that prior to the effective date of any mergers,
          expansion or consolidation of programs or activities which require
          changes in employee work locations, the School Board will give
          written notice to the BTU. Upon request of the BTU, the BTU
          president and the Superintendent. or their respective designee, will
          meet and confer regarding the movement of the employee.

     4.   Employees who desire a transfer shall file a written statement with
          their principal of such desire on such form as set forth in annexed
          Appendix C, one copy of which shall be filed with the principal by
          the employee, one (1) copy filed with the Division of Human
          Resources and one (1) copy to be retained by the employee.

     5.   Posting of Vacancies:        Except in instances when voluntary
          transfers are approved by the Superintendent, the Superintendent
          shall post in all school offices and faculty rooms, all vacancies,
          including the anticipated vacancy list upon publication the subject
          area or grade level of the vacancy, the date the vacancy will occur,
          the qualifications required and the school in which the vacancy
          exists. A vacancy shall be deemed to have occurred when a full-
          time employee is sought to fill a full-time position. Such posting


                                    25-2
          shall be made at least seven (7) working days before the vacancy is
          to be permanently filled. Vacancies in virtual school positions
          shall be advertised in the same manner as full-time positions.

C.   Voluntary Transfers (Regular, Hardship & Guaranteed):

     1.   Transfer applications shall be provided by the District and may be
          submitted any time after January 1st through the last day of the
          regular school year for the following school year.             Such
          applications shall remain active until the following December 31st.
          Any employee who has received an end of the year overall
          evaluation of less than satisfactory for the current and/or previous
          school year is not eligible for transfer. Also, any teacher who is
          under a Performance Development Plan is ineligible for transfer.

          Applicants may request and specifically list ten (10) schools to
          which they are interested in transferring.

     2.   The staff of the Division of Human Resources shall forward all
          such requests to the work locations requested by the applicant.

     3.   Hardship Transfers: For purposes of this section, a "hardship"
          shall be a situation when a teacher has completed a year of service
          with the District and:

          a.    travels 20 miles or more one-way, by the most direct route
                within Broward County limits to the assigned work location;
                or

          b.    has a serious medical and/or personal problem which can
                be substantiated by a Board selected physician or acceptable
                written explanations as determined by the Superintendent.
                Employees meeting the criterion in this section, may apply
                for a medical/personal problem transfer at any time and
                may be transferred after the start of the school year for
                students.

          c.    An employee who meets the "hardship" definition will be
                guaranteed an interview for a Board determined vacancy at
                one (1) of the ten (10) schools the employee selects.

     4.   Transfer Window: Voluntary transfer applicants who have
          requested a specific school for the following school year must all be
          considered before the affected principal can fill the vacancy. Except
          for hardship transfers, no transfer will be allowed if the employee
          does not apply by the last day of the regular school year and then


                                   25-3
     no transfer will be allowed after the close of work on the day before
     school starts for students each year. Factors to be considered by
     the principal include, but are not limited to:

     a.    required certification/qualifications for the position.

     b.    sending and receiving school's faculty racial ratio.

     c.    mutual agreement         of   employee     and       the   affected
           administrators.

     d.    seniority of the affected employee.

5.   Guaranteed Transfers: Voluntary transfer applicants shall be
     granted a transfer if a vacancy exists for the following school year
     in one of ten (10) schools the employee selects based on the
     following conditions listed below. However, no transfer will be
     considered if the employee does not apply by the last day of the
     regular school year. No transfer will be allowed after the close of
     work on the day before school starts for students each year.

     a.    Transfer        applicant         holds        the         required
           certification/qualifications for the position.

     b.    The affected teacher must have completed not less than
           fifteen (15) consecutive years in /her current school.

     c.    Not more than ten (10) percent (rounded up to the nearest
           whole number) of the bargaining unit members at a school
           will be eligible for a transfer under this section. The ten (10)
           percent shall be determined by the longest number of years
           of bargaining unit service at their current school. In case of
           a tie, Article Three, Section E, 3, c-d shall be utilized.

     d.    If more than one eligible teacher requests the same vacancy
           and they are certified for said position, it shall be awarded by
           bargaining unit seniority. Ties shall be broken pursuant to
           the provisions of Article Three, E, 3.

     e.    No school in the District shall be required to accept more
           than the following number of teachers under the provisions
           of this section number 5:
           ESE, elementary                           =1
           Middle                                    =2
           Vocational Centers and High Schools       =3



                               25-4
          f.    The Superintendent can reject a transfer under unusual
                conditions as determined by the Superintendent such as the
                need for diverse staff, ESOL requirements and those
                supplements listed in Article 25, D, 5.

          g.    Transfers under this section shall be processed before
                voluntary transfers requested under section 4 above.

          h.    All transfers under this section shall stop on the close of
                work on the day before school starts for students each year.

     6.   Superintendent Approval: After the day before school starts for
          students each year, the Superintendent may approve voluntary
          transfers under extenuating circumstances as determined by the
          Superintendent.

     7.   Voluntary transfers shall not be processed until such time as the
          District has depleted the list of surplus teachers needing
          placement under Section D. below.

D.   Involuntary Transfers:   Involuntary transfers will be made with the
     approval of the Superintendent when a reduction in the number of
     employees in a school is necessary, or to prevent disruption of the
     instructional program.

     1.   When a reduction in the number of employees in a Board
          designated subject area/program or specific positions within a
          high school, middle school or vocational center is necessary, notice
          of the reduction shall be posted and all volunteers shall first be
          transferred, after which involuntary transfers will be made on the
          basis of seniority in the district, those lowest in time of service in
          the district being transferred first, provided the employee retained
          is qualified to perform the required work. The teacher who
          volunteers to transfer shall provide his/her principal with a list of
          ten (10) schools that he/she would prefer to transfer to. If two or
          more such volunteers request the same school and a vacancy
          exists for which the employee is qualified, the most senior teacher
          shall be transferred to said school. If no vacancies exist at any of
          the ten (10) schools at the time an involuntary transfer is
          necessary, the voluntary teacher(s) shall remain at his/her school
          and an involuntary transfer shall take place pursuant to the
          provisions of this section.

          a.    The parties recognize that in certain vocational
                subjects/disciplines, specific training and experience may be
                required to successfully teach a course. Therefore, when it


                                    25-5
           becomes necessary to surplus a vocational teacher, the
           surplussed teacher must demonstrate one (1) or more of the
           following before being placed in a vacant vocational position:

           1.     Recency of teaching experience in the subject and/or
                  program.

           2.     A license or documentation and/or recency of
                  business/industry work experience necessary to meet
                  the program needs.

     b.    If a surplussed teacher cannot meet the criteria listed above,
           the employee will be placed in a non-vocational (excluding
           dropout prevention) class if said employee has another area
           on his/her certification. If the employee does not have a
           non-vocational area on his/her certification, the employee
           may select one (1) of the following options:

           1.     Placed by the District as a replacement teacher.

           2.     Become retrained and add a new area to his/her
                  certification by taking a critical shortage sabbatical
                  leave.

2.   Reduction By Seniority:         When a reduction in the number of
     employees within an elementary school or exceptional student
     center is necessary, notice of the reduction shall be posted and all
     volunteers shall first be transferred, after which involuntary
     transfers will be made on the basis of seniority in the district,
     those lowest in time of service in the district being transferred first,
     provided the employee retained is qualified to perform the required
     work. The teacher who volunteers to transfer shall provide his/her
     principal with a list of ten (10) schools that he/she would prefer to
     transfer to. If two or more such volunteers request the same
     school and a vacancy exists for which the employee is qualified,
     the most senior teacher shall be transferred to said school. If no
     vacancies exist at any of the ten (10) schools at the time an
     involuntary transfer is necessary, the voluntary teacher(s) shall
     remain at his/her school and an involuntary transfer shall take
     place pursuant to the provisions of this section.

3.   Assigned By Seniority: In filling vacancies, qualified employees
     who are being involuntarily transferred shall be assigned by
     seniority before assignments are made for new employees and for
     employees seeking voluntary transfers.



                               25-6
     4.    Position Assistance: When an involuntary transfer is required,
           the district shall provide assistance in finding a new position which
           the employee would prefer to accept. The district shall provide
           affected employees with a copy of the anticipated vacancy list upon
           publication and all Board declared employee job vacancies. Also,
           said employee(s) shall provide his/her principal and the
           Superintendent's designee with a list of ten (10) schools in the
           county to which they would prefer to be transferred to. If no
           position exists, the employee shall be transferred to an available
           position.

     5.    Exempt from Surplussing: The parties agree that the principal
           has the responsibility to maintain Board approved curricular and
           co-curricular activities.   When it becomes necessary for the
           Superintendent to implement the provisions of this section, the
           principal may provide for the following curricular and co-curricular
           exemptions:

           Athletic director, those head coach positions listed in Appendix F,
           I, D, 2, of this Agreement, drama coach, debate coach, academic
           games sponsor, newspaper sponsor, yearbook sponsor, music,
           primary specialists, Gesell trained primary (K-3) teachers,
           department chairperson, team leader and grade level chairperson.

     6.    Steward Superseniority: One (1) BTU steward per school shall be
           given superseniority and also be exempt from the provisions of
           section five above. The BTU will provide the Superintendent with
           an annual list of the official steward at each school that this
           section shall apply to. This shall be the same steward as the one
           referenced in Article Six, Section F (4) of this agreement.

E.   An employee shall not be assigned or transferred during the term of this
     Agreement on the basis of the amount of salary of the employee.

F.   PROCEDURES TO FILL VACANCIES AT NEW SCHOOLS

     1.    The Superintendent will determine the number of total anticipated
           vacancies at the new schools. Vacancies will be categorized by
           subject areas, i.e., math, science, elementary education, early
           childhood education, art, music, guidance, etc.

     2.    Area Superintendents will inform the Associate Superintendent of
           Human Resources of the number of teachers from feeder schools
           that will need to be transferred.




                                    25-7
3.   Principals at new elementary schools will be permitted to advertise
     district wide and select Grade Level Chairpersons, Media
     Specialist, ESE Specialist, and a Guidance Counselor, immediately
     to assist in the opening of the new school. At new middle schools
     and new high schools, the principal may hire the Department
     Heads and or Team Leaders, Media Specialists, ESE Specialists,
     Athletic Director and Guidance Director.

4.   The principal of the feeder school(s) shall notify staff of the
     necessity to reduce personnel. At the school, the entire staff is
     notified in writing of reduction as per Article 25 of the contract.
     The principal notifies staff of areas where reduction will occur (i.e.,
     number of elementary, early childhood education). Instructional
     Staffing will notify teachers at the feeder school who are on a
     Board approved leave of the necessity to reduce personnel. They
     will be given an opportunity to complete a transfer request form.

5.   The reduction of students from feeder schools determines the
     minimum number of positions available for transferring teachers
     from the feeder schools by using a ratio of 30 to 1 and/or
     appropriate ESE ratios.

6.   Vacancy lists will be made available to those employees at the
     feeder schools.

7.   Employees may complete a voluntary transfer form listing up to
     ten (10) schools and submit it to their principal by April 15th or 45
     days prior to the anticipated opening after the commencement of
     the regular school calendar. If more feeder school employees
     volunteer to transfer to a new school than the number of positions
     created by the reduction of students from feeder schools, 60% of
     the positions from a feeder school will be filled by seniority and the
     principal will interview and select employees for the remainder of
     the positions. If fewer employees apply to transfer than there are
     vacancies, all employees will be transferred to the new school(s).

8.   After voluntary transfers have been exhausted at the feeder school,
     involuntary transfers will take place at the time the District
     processes involuntary transfers district wide.          Involuntary
     transfers shall be handled at the sending (feeder) schools pursuant
     to the provision in Article 25, Section D of the BTU-School Board
     Collective Bargaining Agreement. Principals of schools may retain
     employees identified in this provision for the curricular and co-
     curricular activities pursuant to Article 25. AC employees who
     hold such provisions and who are recommended for employment
     for the next school year shall remain at the schools.


                               25-8
9.    Attempt will be made to keep employees at the same level, i.e.,
      early childhood education, elementary, art, music, physical
      education, etc.

10.   A printout of seniority and certification school-wide will be
      available at all feeder schools for seven (7) workdays prior to the
      deadline for voluntary transfer forms.

11.   New employees to the district will not be hired in applicable
      vacancies until placement of all involuntarily transferred
      employees have been made.




                               25-9
                        ARTICLE TWENTY-SIX
                      REDUCTION IN PERSONNEL


In the event the Board determines that the number of employees must be
reduced for any reason, such reduction in employees shall be based on
objective, reasonable and nondiscriminatory standards which (1) shall
not be arbitrary or capricious; (2) shall not deprive employees of other
rights conferred by this agreement or laws of Florida and the United
States; and (3) shall be capable of uniform application. If a reduction in
employees is determined to be necessary, the following procedure shall
be controlling:

A.    Layoff:

      1.    Prior to implementing a reduction in personnel, the
            Superintendent shall meet with representatives of the BTU to
            discuss the proposed Board action and solicit their
            suggestions.

      2.    The Board shall determine the net number of positions to be
            reduced and the subject area/programs or specific positions
            in which layoff shall occur.

      3.    The least senior employees in each subject area/program or
            specific positions shall then be laid off. See Article Three,
            Section E for the definition of seniority. Retained employees
            must be qualified for their assigned positions. A laid off
            employee is not entitled to replace another employee in a
            different subject area/program. However, if the employee(s)
            identified for layoff holds another certification in a subject
            area/program for which a vacancy exists in the system, then
            said employee(s) shall be offered the vacancy if he/she is
            qualified for the position. If more than one (1) employee with
            dual certification who is to be laid off qualifies for a district
            vacancy, then the job vacancy shall be offered to the most
            senior employee as defined in this contract.

      4.    If layoffs are to occur, a seniority list in accordance with this
            Article shall be prepared by the Board and a copy thereof
            made available to the union.




                                   26-1
B.   Recall:

     1.    Employees will be recalled to the same subject area/program
           they were teaching at the time of their layoff in reverse order
           of layoff when a vacancy occurs.

     2.    Each employee on layoff shall be required to provide the
           district Personnel office in writing with a current address to
           which a letter of recall may be sent.

     3.    If a recall opportunity exists, a letter shall be mailed to the
           employee, certified mail, return receipt requested. If the
           letter is mailed to the address provided by the employee and
           is returned to the Board because the address is incorrect,
           the Board has fulfilled the obligations of this sub-section.

     4.    An employee offered a recall opportunity must notify the
           Board in writing of his/her decision within seventy-two (72)
           hours of receipt of the Board offer.

     5.    An employee who has been laid off shall maintain recall
           rights for twelve (12) twenty-four (24)months from the date of
           layoff or until he/she refuses a recall opportunity, fails to
           respond to a recall letter, submits a resignation, or accepts
           employment in another school district, whichever is less.

C.   An employee who has started his/her tenth sixth year of service
     and who will qualify for retirement by the end of that year shall be
     permitted to complete the school year so as to acquire the
     necessary service to become vested in the retirement system.

D.   No new or substitute appointments may be made while there are
     laid off employees available who are qualified to fill the vacancies.

E.   The employee laid off pursuant to this Article shall be given the
     opportunity to continue insurance coverages in existing programs
     during the layoff provided that the premium for such insurance
     programs shall be paid by the employee on a monthly basis in
     advance of the month due.




                                  26-2
                      ARTICLE TWENTY-SEVEN
                        SCHOOL CALENDAR


A.   The school calendars for the term of this contract shall be as set
     forth in this Agreement and shall not exceed 196 days of service for
     regular contract employees.       However, new bargaining unit
     members shall work 197 days during their first year of
     employment (see Article Five, Section T).

     Should extenuating circumstances require a reexamination of this
     calendar by either party, such re-examination shall occur through
     negotiations prior to final adoption of the respective yearly
     calendar by the Board. The 196 days of service shall include six
     (6) paid holidays for employees. Negotiations under this section
     shall not prevent the Board from establishing and acting on dates
     necessary for the opening or closing of all schools in the district
     and for the conduct of all necessary activities related thereto.

B.   Full-time teachers employed in the Virtual School program shall
     observe the calendar and work year of the state’s virtual school
     program.




                                 27-1
                    ARTICLE TWENTY-EIGHT
                  EMERGENCY SCHOOL CLOSING


A.   Authority:     The Superintendent of Schools shall exercise full
     authority granted under Section), Florida Statutes, to close any or
     all schools during an emergency. When emergencies arise to close
     any or all schools, he/she shall immediately notify the School
     Board of the action taken and the reason therefore and
     immediately implement administrative procedures which will
     include announcements over local television and radio stations
     when such services are made available in order to alert personnel,
     students, parents and the community.

B.   Nothing in this Article shall require the Superintendent or the
     Board to keep schools open in the event of severe inclement
     weather or when otherwise prevented by act of God or a labor
     dispute with employees outside the bargaining unit.

C.   Meeting: When the emergency closing results in a day or days off
     for employees, Board and BTU representatives shall meet within 48
     hours and by mutual agreement recommend amendments to the
     calendar to substitute another day or days work, if necessary, in
     order to fulfill the complete contract year and avoid loss of pay to
     employees and loss of FTE revenue to the Board provided, however,
     if mutual agreement is not reached by the next payroll period, the
     Superintendent shall recommend an appropriate calendar
     adjustment to the Board.

D.   When one (1) or more school or school offices are officially closed
     by the Superintendent, no leave days previously arranged by an
     employee will be deducted for such emergency days.




                                 28-1
                          ARTICLE TWENTY-NINE
                             UNION RIGHTS


A.   Access Rights: The BTU and its representatives shall have the right to
     use the school buildings at all reasonable hours for meetings, in
     accordance with Board policy and rules.

B.   Equipment: The BTU and its representatives may, upon approval of the
     principal, have the right to use school facilities and equipment, including
     typewriters,   mimeographing       machines,      other   duplicating  and
     photocopying equipment, calculating and computing machines, and
     audiovisual equipment at reasonable times, when such equipment is not
     otherwise in use. The BTU may pay for the reasonable cost for such use
     and for all materials and supplies incidental to such use.

C.   Posting of Notices:        The BTU shall have the right to post notices of
     activities and matters of BTU concern in the same location as employee
     mailboxes, as well as on such bulletin boards previously designated or as
     designated by mutual agreement of the BTU steward and the principal.
     Only official BTU notices may be posted. Notices endorsing any national,
     state, or local political candidate shall be prohibited. The BTU shall have
     the right to use the Board mail system providing that the union complies
     with all provisions of the Private Express Statutes, including postage
     requirements.       The parties shall agree on procedures prior to
     implementing the use of Board's mail system. The use of the District
     electronic mail system shall be permitted in accordance with the
     guidelines listed below:

     1.    The District’s electronic mail system is software that is licensed to
           the SBBC for District business purposes and that email
           communications are generally not exempt from the public records
           requirements of Chapter 119, Florida Statutes.

     2.    Use of the District’s electronic mail system is a privilege afforded to
           employees for the efficient operation of the District business
           practices.

     3.    BTU Stewards shall be permitted to access and utilize their
           location electronic mail as it relates to their roles as union
           representatives. The following rules shall apply for such usage:

           a.    BTU Stewards shall abide by Florida Statute, The Code of
                 Ethics and the Principles of Professional Conduct of the




                                     29-1
                 Education Profession in Florida, and the provisions of Article
                 29, Union Rights.

           b.    BTU Stewards shall also comply with all applicable
                 provisions of School Board Policy 5306, School and District
                 Technology Usage.

           c.    The first violation of the provisions outlined in subsection A
                 and B above shall result in a written warning to the offender
                 with a copy to the President of the BTU and the Director of
                 Employee Relations.

           d.    A second violation of the provisions outlined in subsection A
                 and B above shall result in a three-month suspension of
                 electronic mail privileges to the offender. The BTU President
                 and the Director of Employee Relations shall be notified
                 when such action is taken.

           e.    A third violation of the provisions outlined in subsection A
                 and B above, shall result in a six-month suspension of the
                 District electronic mail privileges to the offender. The BTU
                 President and the Director of Employee Relations shall be
                 notified when such action is taken.

           f.    A fourth violation of the provisions outlined in subsection A
                 and B above, shall result in permanent suspension of the
                 District electronic mail privileges for the offender. The BTU
                 President and the Director of Employee Relations shall be
                 notified in writing when such action is taken.

     4.    District employees on leave shall be afforded a District electronic
           mail account.

     5.    The BTU and the SBBC shall jointly provide training to include the
           review of the District’s electronic e-mail policy once per year to the
           BTU stewards.

D.   Conduct Business: Duly authorized representatives of the BTU and its
     respective affiliates may, with the approval of the principal, be permitted
     to transact official union business on school property at all reasonable
     times, provided that this shall not interfere with or disrupt normal school
     operations. Approval will not be unreasonably withheld.

     Stewards will be provided release time to carry out their duties as union
     representatives on six (6) days in the school year as selected by the BTU



                                     29-2
     prior to the start of the school year and excluding any days during the
     first/last week of school or before/after a holiday. BTU shall appoint one
     steward at each worksite who shall be released for the entire workday for
     the purpose of attending union meetings, training activities, joint
     labor/management activities, or for addressing union responsibilities at
     the worksite as determined by the BTU. On one (1) of these six (6) days
     in the school year on a mutually agreed date, the parties agree to
     schedule collaborative training on labor/management issues for stewards
     and administrators.

     For the 2007-2008 school year only, one steward at each school
     appointed by BTU shall be released for one (1) additional day for a total
     of seven (7) days to attend collaborative training for stewards and
     administrators focusing on providing leadership to improve teaching and
     learning. The training shall be developed by a joint committee appointed
     by the Contract Administration Committee. This additional release day
     of training may be continued in future years by mutual agreement of the
     parties.

E.   Information and Reports: The Board agrees to furnish to the BTU, in
     response to reasonable request, annual financial reports and state
     audits, periodic financial reports regularly submitted by the
     Superintendent to the Board; Superintendent's tentative budget and the
     final budget; full Board agendas furnished Board members and minutes
     of Board meetings; names and addresses of all employees, salaries paid
     thereto and certificate rank and years' experience thereof; pupil
     enrollment, enrollment projections, membership and attendance data;
     and such other specific information, if available, as will assist the BTU in
     developing intelligent, accurate, informed and constructive programs on
     behalf of the employees, together with information which may be
     necessary for the BTU to process any grievance.

     Failure to furnish the above requested information shall not be the basis
     of a grievance unless it can be affirmatively shown that the information
     sought can be specifically identified and is available in the form sought
     and the information sought, in the form requested, is denied after a
     reasonable time.       Unintentional inaccuracies of the information
     furnished and subsequent revisions of data based on revised information
     shall not be the basis of a grievance.

F.   Discrimination:     The provisions of the Agreement shall be applied
     without regard to race, creed, color, religion, national origin, age, sex,
     handicap or marital status.




                                     29-3
G.   Board Agenda: The BTU may appear on the Board agenda to discuss
     Board business.    In order to do so, the Superintendent must be
     contacted in accordance with regular notice requirements in advance of
     the Board meeting, in order that the item may be placed on the official
     Board agenda. The presentation shall be limited to the topic listed.

H.   Payroll Dues Deduction:        The Board shall, upon written assignment
     authorization of the employee, deduct BTU dues. The BTU shall furnish,
     distribute and process assignment authorization forms, said forms to be
     filed by BTU with the Division of Human Resources. Employees who
     desire to become members of the BTU shall file their assignment
     authorization forms with the BTU. Pursuant to such authorization, the
     Board shall deduct such annual sum as authorized in equal monthly
     payments from the employee's regular salary check, beginning with the
     salary check received by the employee in the month following the date of
     authorization. Bargaining unit members working less than 7.5 hours per
     day who have authorized dues deduction shall have deducted from their
     pay an amount equal to 50 percent of the dues amount paid by full-time
     teachers. Such authorization shall continue in effect from month to
     month thereafter, unless revoked by the employee in writing to the BTU
     and to the Division of Human Resources, not less than thirty (30) days
     prior to the next payroll cutoff date.

     The deductions shall be remitted not less frequently than monthly to the
     BTU. The right to such dues deductions shall be granted exclusively to
     the BTU and shall not be granted to any other employee organization
     seeking to represent employees in the bargaining unit. The BTU shall
     notify the Division of Human Resources of the amount of any change in
     annual dues to be deducted not later than the last workday of the month
     prior to the month in which such change becomes effective. The BTU
     agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Board, each individual Board
     member, and all administrators against any and all claims, costs, suits
     or other forms of liability and all court costs arising out of the application
     of the provisions of this section.

I.   Other Deductions:       Upon appropriate written authorization from the
     employee, the Board shall deduct from the salary of any employee and
     make appropriate remittance for annuities, credit union, savings bonds,
     charitable donations, insurance, BTU special service programs, or any
     other plans or programs approved by the BTU and the Board as a part of
     this Agreement, or additional programs approved by the Board that are
     not a part of this Agreement. The BTU agrees to indemnify and hold
     harmless the Board, each individual Board member and all
     administrators against any and all administrators against any and all
     claims, costs, suits or other forms of liability, and all court costs arising



                                      29-4
     out of the application of the provisions of this section programs approved
     by the BTU.

J.   School Visitation: The BTU president and/or other BTU representatives
     may, upon approval of the principal, be allowed to visit schools to
     investigate teaching conditions, employee complaints, problems, or for
     other purposes, except political campaigns, relating to BTU affairs.

K.   Reports at Faculty Meetings: The BTU steward(s) shall, upon notice to
     the principal of the agenda, be given an opportunity at each building
     faculty meeting to present brief reports and announcements not to
     exceed ten (10) minutes.

L.   Labor-Management Meeting: Representatives of the Superintendent
     and the BTU may request and shall be granted a Labor-Management
     meeting at any time during the school year for the purpose of discussing
     the administration of this Agreement. Each party will submit to the
     other, at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting, an agenda
     covering what it wishes to discuss.

M.   Membership Pins: No employee shall be prevented from wearing pins
     or other identification of membership in the BTU or its affiliates.

N.   State Convention: The school calendar each year shall include a
     teacher planning day on that Friday during the annual convention of the
     state affiliate of the BTU. Employees with official responsibilities at such
     meeting, as verified to the Superintendent by the BTU president, shall be
     granted temporary duty leave for that Friday.

O.   Union Leave: The president and vice president of the BTU, the president
     of the state affiliate, and the executive officers of the national affiliate
     shall be granted temporary duty leave for their respective term of office.
     Also, a bargaining unit member holding a professional service
     contract/continuing contract who is hired by the Broward Teachers
     Union as a full-time staff representative is eligible for a temporary duty
     leave.

     Upon return from leave, the employee shall be placed in the same
     position held before such leave, or if such position is not available, to a
     substantially equivalent position within the scope of the employee's
     certification.   Such employee shall have the right to continue
     participation in the retirement system and insurance programs of the
     district, as well as to receive credit for salary increments, all as if in
     actual service to the district. The BTU shall reimburse the Board for the
     actual cost of such employee's salary and benefits.



                                     29-5
P.   Paid Leave Days: The Board shall provide a pool of paid leave days not
     to exceed 1,500 in any given school year for the purpose of conducting
     certain union business. The following criteria shall govern the use of
     said leave days:

     1.    The BTU president or his/her designee shall notify the Board's
           Director of Employee Relations or his/her designee not later than
           five (5) working days in advance of the requested leave day. The
           purpose and nature of the leave shall also be provided at that time.

     2.    Through the Employee Relations Department, the Board shall pay
           the cost of the substitute, if required, for any requested leave by an
           employee to attend special meetings called by the Board or to
           participate on any committee identified in this Agreement. Such
           leave shall not be deducted from the pool of leave days allocated to
           the BTU.

           If the reason for the requested leave is for the purpose of
           conducting union business, then the BTU shall reimburse the
           Board the actual cost of the substitute, in a timely manner. Such
           leave days shall be deducted from the pool of leave days allocated
           to the BTU.

     3.    No bargaining unit member may use more than five (5) consecutive
           workdays of leave in a school year. No bargaining unit member
           may use more than fifteen (15) days from the pool in a school year.
           However, by mutual agreement, this limitation may be extended by
           the parties.

Q.   Computer Tapes:       The Board agrees to provide to the BTU the dues
     deduction computer tape printout from PY511J, or its equivalent if the
     system should change, as requested by BTU, to transfer data to BTU
     contracted independent computer services. BTU agrees to reimburse the
     Board for the actual additional cost of such service.

R.   Sole Bargaining Agent: The rights granted to BTU in this Agreement
     shall be granted to BTU exclusively as the sole and exclusive bargaining
     agent and shall not be granted to any employee organization seeking to
     represent employees in the bargaining unit.

S.   Contract Enforcement:         BTU officers, stewards and other BTU
     representatives shall be allowed to engage in activities directly related to
     the administration of the Agreement when not directly instructing
     students.



                                     29-6
T.   Roster of Bargaining Unit: The Board agrees to furnish the BTU, four
     (4) times each year, June 15, September 15, December 15, and March
     15, two (2) full file information rosters of bargaining unit members, (one
     in alphabetical order by location--one in alphabetical order).

U.   Parking/I.D. Passes: The President of the BTU and all full-time paid
     professional BTU staff shall receive parking and identification passes
     that allow parking and personal entry into the Kathleen C. Wright
     Administration Building. The BTU shall provide a written list of paid,
     professional staff members, and the name of the President of the Union
     to the Associate Superintendent of Human Resources. This provision
     does not cover BTU support staff, such as secretaries. The number of
     passes shall not exceed fifteen (15).

V.   Harassment of Steward(s): The official BTU steward(s) at each school
     should not be subject to harassment, abusive language, upbraiding,
     insults or interference by a principal in the performance of the steward's
     official union duties. Steward complaints under this paragraph shall not
     be subject to the provisions of Article Thirty-Four but shall be directed to
     the appropriate Area Superintendent for final and binding decision. The
     BTU shall provide a list to the Superintendent not later than March 1st
     of each year containing the names of the official BTU stewards at each
     school. The number of stewards at each school is limited to the formula
     listed in Appendix L of this agreement. The BTU will provide the
     Superintendent with the names of new stewards who are replacing
     another steward whenever such action is necessary.

W.   Superseniority for Stewards pertaining to summer school employment,
     and involuntary transfers can be found in Article Six-F and Article
     Twenty-Five D respectively.

X.   Florida Law: Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny or
     restrict to any employee rights granted under the Florida School Laws or
     other applicable laws and regulations.

Y.   Release Time for Union Meetings: BTU stewards and members of the
     BTU Executive Board may be released early to attend monthly meetings,
     with the approval of the principal, provided that this shall not interfere
     with or disrupt normal school operations.         Approval will not be
     unreasonably denied.

     The BTU agrees to provide the Associate Superintendent for Human
     Resources with a list of stewards and Executive Board members and




                                     29-7
     shall also provide a schedule of their meetings by September 15th each
     year.

Z.   Stewards’ planning periods shall be scheduled at the end of the student
     day, where feasible.




                                   29-8
                             ARTICLE THIRTY
                             MISCELLANEOUS


A.   Parties Commitment: This Agreement shall constitute the full and
     complete commitments between both parties, and may be altered,
     changed, added to, deleted from or modified only through the voluntary
     mutual consent of the parties in written and signed amendment to this
     Agreement.

B.   Legality:    Should any provision of this Agreement be declared illegal by
     a court of competent jurisdiction or as a result of state or federal
     legislation, said provision shall be automatically modified by mutual
     agreement of the parties to the extent that it violates the law, but the
     remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect for the duration
     of this Agreement, if not affected by the deleted provision.

C.   Policy-Rules:      This Agreement shall supersede any policies, rules,
     regulations or practices of the Board which are contrary to or
     inconsistent with the terms of this Agreement.

D.   Individual Contract: If an individual contract between the Board and
     an employee contains any language inconsistent with this Agreement,
     this Agreement, during its duration, shall be controlling.

E.   Cost:      The parties mutually agree to share the cost of printing this
     Agreement, and the Union shall be responsible for distributing copies to
     all bargaining unit members. The parties must agree on who will print
     the Agreement and the cost prior to reproducing it.

F.   Summer School: The provisions of this Agreement shall be fully effective
     during and for any summer school programs falling within the term of
     this Agreement, unless otherwise indicated.

G.   Advanced Degree Stipend Committee:

     1.   The Board and the BTU agree to establish and maintain an
          Advanced Degree Stipend Committee to develop all procedures,
          guidelines and other aspects governing the awarding of in-field
          advanced degree stipends. Such procedures and guidelines shall be
          subject to review and final approval by the Superintendent and the
          President of the BTU.

     2.   The Superintendent shall appoint three (3) Committee members and
          the President of the BTU shall appoint three (3) members. The
          Committee shall function for the term of this contract.      The


                                     30-1
          Superintendent of the BTU President may change their appointees at
          any time.
     3.   The Superintendent and the president of the BTU are empowered to
          make amendments to the procedures and guidelines.

     4.   The Committee will design an appeals procedure for applicants
          whose applications for advanced degree stipends are disapproved.
          The Committee shall be the final step of this procedure and their
          decision is final and not grievable or arbitrable.

H.   Contract Administration Committee:

     1.    The purpose of this Committee is to address issues of concern
           related to labor relations. The Committee shall not address the
           subject of a pending grievance.      The Committee shall be
           empowered to discuss topics and make recommendations to the
           Superintendent and the BTU President. Recommendations for
           new/modified collective bargaining language or joint legislative
           proposals shall be considered.

     2.    The Committee can listen to and consider information presented
           from guests that are jointly invited by the Committee.

     3.    All contractual sub-committees and specially formed task forces
           and/or ad-hoc committees formed jointly by the parties shall be
           organized under the direction of the Contract Administration
           Committee. Said committees and task forces shall periodically
           report to the Contract Administration Committee. The parties
           agree to mutually adopt guidelines and procedures to implement
           this section.

     4.    Committee Purpose and Agenda

           The purpose of these committees is to provide a means for
           continuing communications between the parties and to promote a
           climate of constructive employee-employer relations. This would
           include, but not limited to, such activities as to:

           a.    Discuss and resolve contractual issues subject to
                 appropriate approval;
           b.    Notify and discuss with the Union changes contemplated by
                 the District which may affect bargaining unit employees;
           c.    Discuss the future needs and programs of the District and
                 the BTU;
           d.    Disseminate general information of interest to the parties;


                                   30-2
     e.   Give the parties the opportunity to discuss their views
          and/or make suggestions on subjects affecting those
          employees;
     f.   Give the parties the opportunity to discuss the problems that
          may give rise to outstanding grievances and to discuss ways
          of preventing contract violations and other workplace
          conflicts from occurring (The parties agree that the
          discussion of individual grievances is not an appropriate
          topic for Contract Administration Committees);
     g.   Such other items as the parties may mutually agree to
          discuss.

5.   All committees will be co-chaired by a union and district
     representative. The agenda for each meeting shall be jointly
     prepared by the co-chairpersons in advance of the meeting. The
     parties are committed to a timely completion and distribution of
     the minutes. The minutes shall not be construed as constituting a
     binding agreement or negotiations between the parties.

6.   Unless mutually agreed otherwise, such meetings shall be held
     during normal work hours.




                             30-3
                     ARTICLE THIRTY-ONE
     MANAGEMENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE SCHOOL
                          DISTRICT


A.    It is understood and agreed that the district possesses the right and
      responsibility to operate and manage all schools, departments and
      programs and to direct the work forces. The rights, powers, authority,
      and discretion necessary for the district to carry out these rights and
      responsibilities shall be limited only by the express terms of this
      Agreement and shall be exercised in a manner consistent with this
      Agreement and Florida Statutes.      In matters not covered by this
      Agreement, the district shall have the right to make administrative
      decisions.

B.    Consistent with this Agreement, the Management Rights shall include,
      but not be limited to, the following:

      1.   Determine the purpose and mission of the Broward County school
           system, and the department and agencies under its jurisdiction.

      2.   Set standards of service to be offered to the public.

      3.   Establish employee job descriptions.

      4.   Direct its employees and establish standards of performance and
           conduct, including the right to make reasonable rules and
           regulations for the purpose of efficiency, safe practices and
           discipline.

      5.   Introduce new, improved or different methods and techniques of
           operation or work procedure.

      6.   Relieve employees from duty because of lack of work, lack of funds,
           or for other legitimate reasons.

      7.   Take disciplinary action for just cause.

      8.   Hire, promote, transfer or assign employees.

C.    The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations which preceded
      this Agreement, each had the unlimited right and opportunity to make
      demands and proposals with respect to any subject or matter, and that
      the understandings and agreements arrived at by the parties after the
      exercise of that right and opportunity are set forth in this Agreement.



                                     31-1
This Agreement, including its supplements and exhibits attached hereto,
concludes all collective bargaining between the parties during the term
hereof, and constitutes the sole, entire and existing agreement between
the parties hereto, and supersedes all prior agreements, oral and written,
expressed or implied, between the district and the BTU, and expresses all
obligations and restrictions imposed upon each of the respective parties
during its term.




                               31-2
                          ARTICLE THIRTY-TWO
                               NO STRIKE


The Broward Teachers Union, and its officers, agents, representatives, and
members agree that they will comply with the provisions of Florida Statutes
447.203 (6), 447.501 (2) and 447.505.




                                   32-1
                          ARTICLE THIRTY-THREE
                                  ESOL


A.   All new teachers will be informed in writing of the State ESOL
     requirements and each teacher will comply with them.

B.   Notification: At the time an ESOL student is placed in the classroom of
     a teacher who has not previously been assigned an ESOL student, the
     teacher shall be informed in writing of the State ESOL requirements. A
     student’s ESOL status will be noted in virtual counselor. The District will
     hold quarterly ESOL orientation programs either electronically or on an
     independent study basis.

C.   Summer Inservice:        The district will offer a final ESOL inservice
     opportunity during the summer for those teachers whose time frame for
     obtaining the ESOL endorsement expires between the end of the one (1)
     school year and the beginning of the next. The teacher will earn inservice
     points and all costs shall be incurred by the District.

D.   Planning Days:        ESOL training classes will be offered during six (6)
     teacher planning days per year on an ongoing basis during the school year
     either electronically or on an independent study basis.

     Temporary Duty Authorization:          Category I teachers who are in their
     second year of their initial ESOL requirement will be provided with
     temporary duty authorization to attend an ESOL class offered during the
     six (6) planning days, if necessary, on a first come first serve basis.

E.   The parties agree to request a legal opinion from the State Department of
     Education on whether or not video tapes can be used in lieu of workshop
     training under the META agreement. The District will produce a series of
     tapes for self instruction to allow affected teachers to earn the ESOL
     endorsement.




                                     33-1
                          ARTICLE THIRTY-FOUR
                         GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE


A.   Definition: Any claim by an employee(s), or the BTU that there has been
     a violation, misinterpretation or misapplication of any provision of this
     Agreement may be processed as a grievance as hereinafter provided.

B.   Exclusive Rights:         The parties agree that the BTU has the exclusive
     right to process grievances under all steps of this grievance procedure,
     except that any bargaining unit member may process a grievance
     through said procedure if the BTU expressly waives its right in writing to
     process a grievance because the unit member is not a dues-paying
     member of the union. A copy of the waiver shall be provided to the
     school district's Director of Employee Relations. The union accepts its
     duty of fair representation but retains its right to preclude the processing
     of non-meritorious grievances through the steps of this grievance
     procedure, inclusive of arbitration.

C.   Informal Discussion: In the event that an employee believes there is a
     basis for a grievance, he/she shall first discuss promptly the alleged
     grievance with the immediate supervisor either personally or, if he/she
     prefers, accompanied by a BTU steward, within fifteen (15) working days
     of the date on which the employee could reasonably have known of the
     occurrence of the event giving rise to the alleged grievance.

D.   Formal Grievance:        If, as a result of the informal discussion with the
     immediate supervisor, an alleged grievance still exists, the following
     formal grievance procedure may be invoked within five (5) working days
     of the informal discussion, on the form set forth in annexed Appendix A,
     signed by the grievant and/or a steward of the BTU, which form shall be
     available from the principal or the BTU steward in each building. If the
     grievance involves more than one (1) school building, a group of
     employees, or arises from the action or inaction of the administration
     above the level of the immediate supervisor, it may be initially filed with
     the Superintendent at Step II and informal discussion may be waived by
     mutual agreement. In the event that a BTU steward has not signed the
     grievance, a copy of the grievance shall be provided to the BTU
     immediately upon the filing of the grievance.


     STEP I

     The grievant may submit to the immediate supervisor a copy of the
     grievance form. Within five (5) working days of receipt of the grievance,



                                     34-1
the immediate supervisor shall meet with the grievant and/or the BTU in
an effort to resolve the grievance. The immediate supervisor shall
indicate the disposition of the grievance in writing within five (5) working
days after such meeting, and shall furnish a copy thereof to the BTU.

STEP II

If the grievant or BTU is not satisfied with the disposition of the
grievance, or if no disposition has been made within the specified time
limit, the grievance shall be submitted to the Superintendent within five
(5) ten (10) working days of the disposition, or expiration of the time
limit. Within twelve (12) working days of receipt of the grievance, the
Superintendent shall meet with the grievant and/or the BTU and shall
indicate the disposition of the grievance in writing to the grievant and/or
BTU within five (5) days of such a meeting.

STEP III

If the grievant is not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance by the
Superintendent, or if no disposition has been made within the specified
time limit, the grievance may be submitted by the BTU to arbitration
before an impartial arbitrator within fifteen (15) working days of the date
of the disposition at Step II, or the expiration of the time limit. If the
parties cannot agree as to the arbitrator within five (5) working days from
the notification date that arbitration will be pursued, the BTU will
contact the Employee Relations Department staff one final time for the
purpose of attempting to reach agreement prior to requesting the AAA or
FMCS to select an arbitrator in accordance with their rules. The
arbitrator shall be selected by the American Arbitration Association or
the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service in accordance with their
rules, which rules must likewise govern the arbitration proceedings. The
arbitrator shall limit his/her decision to the application and
interpretation of this agreement and shall have no power to amend,
modify, nullify, alter, and to, or subtract from the terms of this
Agreement. The Superintendent and the BTU shall not be permitted to
assert in such arbitration proceedings any ground or rely on any
evidence not previously disclosed to the other party. Both parties agree
that the award of the arbitrator shall be final and binding.

STEP III (ALTERNATE)

A grievance arising from the provisions of Article Ten shall be subject to
the grievance procedure in this Article, except that Step III shall be as
follows: If the grievant and/or the BTU is not satisfied with the
disposition of the grievance by the Superintendent, or if no disposition



                                34-2
     has been made within the specified time limit, the grievance may be
     submitted to the Board by the BTU by filing a copy of the grievance with
     the Board Chairperson within fifteen (15) working days of the date of the
     disposition at Step II, or the expiration of the time limit. The Board
     Chairperson shall schedule a meeting on the grievance to be held within
     ten (10) working days of the date the grievance is received. The Board
     shall indicate its disposition of the grievance in writing to the BTU
     through the Board Chairperson within five (5) working days of the
     meeting. The disposition of the Board shall be final and binding and
     shall not be subject to court or administrative review.

E.   Cost of Arbitration

     If the arbitrator sustains the position of the grievant, the fees and
     expenses of the arbitrator, including AAA or FMCS filing fees, shall be
     paid by the Board. However, if the arbitrator sustains the Board's
     position, all fees and expenses shall be paid by the grievant or the BTU.
     If the decision issued by the arbitrator is not the one requested by either
     party, the arbitrator shall determine the distribution of his/her fees
     between the parties. Each party shall be responsible for any other
     expense it chooses to incur. Employees required to testify will be made
     available without loss of pay; however, whenever possible, they will be
     placed on call to minimize time lost from work. Employees who have
     completed their testimony shall return to work unless they are the
     grievant(s). In group grievances, the group of employees shall be
     represented by the BTU and one member of the group.

F.   Time Limits:       The time limits provided in this Article shall be strictly
     observed, but may be extended by written agreement of the parties. In
     the event a grievance is filed after May 1st of any year and strict
     adherence to the time limits may result in hardship to any party, the
     parties shall use their best efforts to process such grievances prior to the
     end of the school term or as soon thereafter as possible. Whenever
     illness or other incapacity of either party or its representatives prevents
     attendance at a grievance meeting, the time limits shall be extended to
     such time that such person(s) can be present. When such grievance
     meetings and conferences are held during school hours, all employees
     whose presence is required shall be excused, without loss of pay or
     accumulated leave, for that purpose.

G.   Adjustment:       Adjustment of any grievance as described herein shall
     not be inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement.

H.   Reprisal to Employees:       All employees will be entitled to fair,
     reasonable and equitable treatment in the processing of grievances. No



                                     34-3
     reprisals of any kind will be made by the Board or its representative or
     any member of the administration against any bargaining unit member(s)
     in the grievance procedure by reason of such participation.                All
     documents, grievance forms, appendix, communications, and records
     dealing with the processing of a grievance, shall be filed separately from
     the personnel files of any party in interest, including final disposition.

I.   Notwithstanding, the expiration of this Agreement, any claim or
     grievance arising thereunder may be process through the grievance
     procedure until resolution.

J.   Appeal:      If the Board takes any actions as contained in Florida
     Statute 1012.33 against a bargaining unit member, said unit member(s)
     shall be entitled to those appeal rights granted under F.S. 1012.33. The
     parties agree that affected employees may not grieve nor arbitrate
     charges/actions contained in F.S. 1012.33 under Article Thirty-Four of
     this Agreement, nor any other applicable arbitration statutes.

K.   Waiver:      If the BTU waives its right to process a grievance to
     arbitration because the affected employee is not a dues-paying member
     of the union, the employee may carry the case forward but he/she may
     be responsible for all arbitration costs pursuant to the provisions in
     Section E above. Under such circumstances, the BTU shall not be
     responsible for arbitration costs associated with the specific grievances.

L.   School Board Policies: One (1) set of School Board policies at each work
     location shall be available to union stewards for the purpose of reference
     and information, as well as for the purpose of expediting the provisions of
     this grievance procedure. The Board policy book cannot be removed
     from its assigned location without the approval of the principal.

M.   Expedited Arbitration: On a case-by-case basis, the parties may
     mutually agree to utilize an expedited arbitration procedure. For the
     1998-99 school year, the parties agree that up to four (4) arbitrations
     may be expedited if requested by the Superintendent or of the BTU. The
     specific procedures covering all aspects of the expedited arbitration
     hearing must be mutually agreed to by the parties prior to the
     scheduling of the hearing. The four (4) expedited arbitrations mentioned
     above will not be utilized for class action grievances unless mutually
     agreed upon by the Superintendent and the BTU and will be limited to
     those grievances whose remedy would not cost the district more than five
     thousand dollars ($5,000) per case.       The parties shall select the
     arbitrator through lists furnished by American Arbitration Association
     and the hearing shall be conducted under their rules and regulations for
     expedited arbitration.



                                      34-4
                            ARTICLE THIRTY-FIVE
                                 INCLUSION


A.   Training Plan: When the affected school's IEP Committee recommends
     placement in a regular education classroom for a student with a severe
     disability who is already attending a Broward County school, a training
     plan shall be developed by the receiving school, with the input of the
     sending school staff and the receiving teachers, prior to the student
     attending the regular classroom. Health and Safety training components
     of the plan will be completed prior to the student's placement.

B.   New Student to District: When a student with a severe disability with
     an IEP that includes placement in a regular class transfers to Broward
     County from another county or state, a training plan shall be developed by
     the receiving school, with the input of the receiving teachers, no later than
     ten (10) days after the first day of the student's attendance in a district
     school. Health and Safety training components of the plan will be
     completed prior to the student's placement.

C.   Students Placed With Volunteer Teachers:          Recognizing that special
     needs students who are placed into the regular school program are more
     likely to be successful when the teacher receiving the student has
     volunteered for the assignment, the district shall seek teacher volunteers
     for the Inclusion program.




                                      35-1
                              ARTICLE THIRTY-SIX
                             TERM OF AGREEMENT


A.    This agreement shall be effective as of August 16, 20012011 and shall
      remain in effect through August 15, 20092014.

      For the eighth year (2008-2009) of this contract 2011-2012 school year,
      either party is entitled to reopen the contract for the purpose of
      negotiating those articles needed to implement the recommendations of
      committees to comply with legislative mandates. The language contained
      in paragraph 7 of the Oversight Committee Memorandum of
      Understanding between the parties is incorporated by reference. For the
      2012-2013 and 2013-2014 school years, either party is entitled to reopen
      the contract for the purpose of negotiating salaries and insurance, except
      for health insurance provisions contained in Article 22, Section B(1)(a)
      through B(1)(f) and Section B(2). Additionally, for the eighth year of the
      contract those two years, each party may select two (2) articles each to
      negotiate plus issues unresolved by the committees to comply with
      legislative mandates and/or Contract Administration Committee.
      Negotiations to resolve said articles may commence any time after May
      1st of each year.

B.    Commencement of Negotiations:        No later than May 1, 20082014,
      either party may require, by written notice to the other, the
      commencement of negotiations for a successor agreement.

THE SCHOOL BOARD OF BROWARD                BROWARD TEACHERS UNION
COUNTY, FLORIDA



Chair, Benjamin Williams                       President, Patrick Santeramo



Interim Superintendent, Donnie Carter          First Vice President, Bernie Schultz



Chief Negotiator, Dorothy Davis                Chief Negotiator, George Segna




                                        36-1
                  SBBC NEGOTIATION TEAM

                        Chief Negotiator

         Dorothy Davis, Specialist, Employee Relations

                      Co-Chief Negotiator

        Lerenzo Calhoun, Specialist, Employee Relations

                        Team Members

        Susan Cooper, Specialist, Employee Relations
 Chuck McCanna, Principal, Nova Blanche Forman Elementary
      Susan Rockelman, Director, Instructional Staffing
       Michael Ramirez, Principal, Coral Glades High


                  BTU NEGOTIATION TEAM

                        Chief Negotiator

George Segna, Director of Field Services, Broward Teachers Union

                        Team Members

        Evelyn Acevedo, Teacher, Cresthaven Elementary
           Wade Brosz, Teacher, Indian Ridge Middle
          Adam Cohen, Teacher, South Broward High
           Jillian Haring, Teacher, Forest Glen Middle
        Pamela Mosser, Teacher, Broadview Elementary




                             36-2
                              APPENDIX A
                       ADVANCED DEGREE STIPENDS
                   PROCEDURES FOR IN-FIELD INCENTIVES


It is agreed that the purpose of the in-field provisions of the contract is to
enhance the quality of education for students in Broward County by providing
employees increased financial incentive for the pursuit of further study and
expertise in their respective fields.

I.   Eligibility

     A.     Employees who hold or who obtain an incentive and/or a master’s
            specialist or doctoral degree in the subject matter field/position to
            which they are assigned, except as noted, shall be eligible.

     B.     Employees who hold a master’s specialist or doctoral degree and a
            total of fifteen (15) graduate semester hours (or the equivalent) in
            the subject matter field/position to which they are assigned shall
            be eligible.

            In order to satisfy the requirements above, up to six (6) credit
            hours in guidance and counseling will be accepted from elementary
            school teachers and three (3) credit hours in guidance and
            counseling will be accepted from secondary and post secondary
            teachers.

     C.     Employees who are otherwise eligible but who are placed
            administratively in an assignment other than that in which they
            meet the requirements shall be eligible. However, when the
            employee is offered a position in the school in the subject field of
            eligibility for the credential payment, the employee must accept the
            position offered in order to maintain the payment.

     D.     Graduate course work and/or degrees in the area of reading,
            mathematics, computer education, and/or exceptional student
            education shall be considered in-field for all personnel.

     E.     If any degree or incentive qualifies as in-field, all degrees and
            incentives qualify as in-field.

     F.     Graduate course work and/or degrees in designated critical
            shortage areas shall be considered in-field for all personnel.




                                      A-1
      PLEASE NOTE:    IF AN EMPLOYEE QUALIFIES UNDER                        THIS
      SECTION, THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL CONDITIONS APPLY:

      1.   If the specific critical shortage area under which an employee
           qualified is no longer a designated critical shortage area, the
           employee will maintain the in-field stipend for one additional year.

      2.   If an employee who qualifies under this section is not assigned to a
           critical shortage area, the employee must accept a position, if
           offered, in a critical shortage area, in order to maintain the in-field
           payment. The parties shall recommend a critical shortage area list
           to the Superintendent.

II.   Degrees and Course Work Areas Defined As In-Field

      A.   Subject fields shall be broadly defined. For example: Language
           arts shall encompass reading, literature, composition, speech,
           debate, drama, grammar and journalism. Social students shall
           include history, geography, sociology, economics, government,
           civics, political science, psychology.

      B.   The concept of broad interpretation of subject field shall apply to
           all areas.   Examples enumerated shall not be construed as
           limitations, to the exclusion of course areas traditionally
           recognized as related and germane.

      C.   Agreement upon any guideline or set of guidelines shall not be
           construed as precluding further agreement upon other guidelines
           or set of guidelines subsequently perceived as necessary to the
           implementation of these provisions.

      D.   Descriptions of content, as well as titles, codes, and numbers,
           shall be valid indicators of the applicability of courses or degrees.

           1.    Teachers at Elementary Level
                 Teachers at the elementary school level (including
                 specialists, such as music, art and physical education
                 teachers, as well as regular classroom teachers, media PREP
                 specialists, E.S.E. specialists).

                 a.    Master’s specialists or doctoral degree in elementary
                       education and/or early childhood education.

                 b.    Certification at the elementary education level and a
                       master’s, specialist or doctoral degree and/or courses



                                      A-2
           in academic disciplines: language arts, mathematics,
           science, social studies.

     c.    Certification at the elementary education level and a
           master’s, specialist or doctoral degree and/or health
           education, exceptional student education, consumer
           economics, career education.

2.   Teachers at the Secondary Level
     Master’s specialist or doctoral degree and/or courses in
     specific subjects by name (for example)
     a.     Academic disciplines
            1.    Language Arts
            2.    Mathematics
            3.    Science
            4.    Social Studies
            5.    Foreign Languages
     b.     Other fields
            1.    Music
            2.    Art
            3.    Physical education and/or health, safety, driver
                  education
            4.    Exceptional student education
            5.    Industrial arts/vocational technical education
            6.    Business education
     c.     Sixth grade teachers are eligible under either the
            elementary or secondary standards.
     d.     Teachers for English for Speakers of Other Languages
            (ESOL)
            The guidelines for teachers ESOL shall be the same as
            those for other teachers of language arts.
     e.     Teachers of Foreign Languages
            1.    Master’s specialist or doctoral degree with
                  graduate major in the language.
            2.    Graduate courses work from among the
                  following:
                  Culture,     literature,  history,    government,
                  economics, geography, etc., of the country or
                  countries in which the language is spoken.
     f.     Teachers of Exceptional Students
            1.    Teachers whose assignments involve children
                  with the same disability (e.g., the blind, the
                  hearing impaired, etc.) are encouraged to
                  enhance their expertise in meeting the needs of
                  students which is specific to that disability.



                        A-3
     2.   In recognition, however, that:
          a.     all exceptional students, regardless of
                 their disability, have common problems
                 and needs; and
          b.     affliction with one disability does not
                 preclude affliction with others; and
          c.     the     body    of     knowledge    regarding
                 exceptionalities is developing; graduate
                 degrees and/or courses in the other areas
                 of exceptional student education, as well
                 as degrees or courses in the areas of
                 specific    disabilities,  and    elementary
                 education shall be considered in-field for
                 teachers of exceptional students.
g.   Guidance Counselors
     1.   Master’s, specialist or doctoral degree in
          guidance and counseling.
     2.   Graduate course work from among the areas
          specified for certification in guidance.
h.   School Psychologists
     1.   Master’s specialist or doctoral degree in
          psychology or school psychology.
     2.   Graduate course work from among the areas
          specified for advanced degree certification in
          school psychology.
i.   School Social Worker
     1.   Master’s, specialist or doctoral degree in
          psychology or school psychology.
     2.   Graduate course work from among the areas
          specified      for   Florida     advanced     degree
          certification as a visiting teacher.
j.   Teachers Assigned to Alternative Schools (North Point,
     South Area Alternative School, E.S.E. Off-Campus)
     1.   Master’s specialist or doctoral degree in subject
          matter field, or special education.
     2.   Graduate course work from among the following
          areas:
          a.     Individual’s subject matter field
          b.     Guidance and counseling
          c.     Special education
          d.     Child growth and development or human
                 behavior
          e.     Health education

k.   Educational Media Specialist/Librarians



                   A-4
     1.    Master’s, specialist or doctoral degree in library
           science/educational media/ learning resources.
     2.    Graduate course work from among the areas
           specified for certification as an educational
           media specialist.
l.   Business     Education     or    Cooperative   Business
     Education Teachers
     1.    Master’s, specialist or doctoral degree in
           business education.
     2.    Graduate course work in any of the following
           areas:
           a.     Accounting or bookkeeping
           b.     Economics
           c.     Shorthand
           d.     Typing
           e.     Business Law
           f.     Business Mathematics
           g.     Business English
           h.     Business Administration
           i.     Business and/or office machines
           j.     Data processing/computers
           k.     Sales/marketing
           l.     Vocational Education
m.   Home Economics Teachers
     1.    Master’s, specialist or doctoral degree with a
           graduate major in home economics or
     2.    Graduate course work in any of the following
           areas:
           a.     Housing
           b.     Home management
           c.     Family economics or consumer economics
                  or family finance
           d.     Marriage and family relationships
           e.     Child care and development
           f.     Career education
           g.     Food, nutrition, chemistry, bacteriology,
                  physiology
           h.     Clothing and textiles
           i.     Interior decoration
           j      Health
n.   Teachers in Work Experience, Diversified Cooperative
     Training
     1.    Master’s, specialist or doctoral degree in
           business education, vocational education,
           mathematics or language arts.



                  A-5
     2.    Graduate course work in any of the following
           areas shall also be applicable
           a.     Business education
           b.     Career education
           c.     Mathematics
           d.     Language Arts
           e.     Skill areas in vocational education
o.   Teachers in Cooperative Health Occupation Education
     (with Bachelor’s degree)
     1.    Master’s specialist or doctoral degree in nursing
           education.
p.   Teachers in Cooperative Distributive Education
     1.    Master’s, specialist or doctoral degree in
           economics, marketing, sales and merchandising,
           vocational education.
     2.    Graduate course work in economics, sales and
           merchandising, vocational education.
q.   Industrial Arts Teachers
     1.    Master’s, specialist or doctoral degree with a
           graduate major in industrial arts or vocational
           education.
     2.    Graduate course work from among the following
           areas: metals, woods, power and transportation
           mechanics, graphic arts, drafting and design,
           crafts, electricity, electronics, or vocational
           education.
r.   Teachers on Task Assignment at the District or Area
     Level
     1.    A master’s, specialist or doctoral degree in their
           subject area, or administrative certification.
     2.    Graduate courses in their subject area.
     3.    Individuals     who     otherwise    satisfy   the
           requirements shall not be denied eligibility on
           the basis of their serving in such capacities.
s.   Adult Education Teachers at Adult Centers
     1.    Master’s, specialist or doctoral degree in adult
           education or the specialist academic disciplines
           in their area of teaching.
     2.    Graduate course work in individual’s subject
           matter field.
t.   Other Vocational/Technical Education Teachers
     1.    Master’s, specialist or doctoral degree in adult or
           vocational education and/or course work in
           individual’s subject matter field.




                   A-6
                          2.    For vocational technical education teachers
                                seeking to satisfy the 15 semester hours’
                                requirement, course work in professional
                                industrial education and other appropriate
                                technical courses shall be applicable.

Vocational, technical, industrial and cooperative health education teachers who
hold equivalency certificates.

Since equivalency certificates are granted by the Department of Education or
the basis of work and/or business experience and ranked in accordance with
the Department of Education regulations regarding recognition of experience in
a specific area of expertise, it is agreed that Holders of advance vocational
equivalency certificates in their teaching field shall be eligible for the credential
payment at the level of eligibility.

Recognition of Equivalency Certification
Equivalency Certification Recognized - In accordance with applicable statutory
and/or regulatory provisions, experience in business or industry which
contributes directly to the effectiveness of one’s teaching shall be acknowledged
as equivalent to specified degrees for Agricultural Distributive, Technical,
Industrial, Vocational Home Economics, Health Occupations, and
Occupational/Placement Specialist as follows:

Work Experience and
Certification                                                    Equivalency

Held State Temporary                                      Bachelor’s Degree
Certification (Pursuant to
Plans 1,3,4,5,6 or 7 of
Florida Administrative
Code Rule 6A-4.42) When
initially hired by SBBC

Subsequently Attained Master’s Degree
State Advanced Vocational Certification

Employees initially hired in the above programs with a Bachelor’s or higher
degree from a standard institution with specialization in an occupational field
are not eligible for payments authorized under this provision.

III.   Application, Processing and Appeal Procedures




                                        A-7
Applicant must submit an application form approved by the joint
BTU/SBBC Task Force and made available to employees by county
public schools.

Applicant may submit either a student copy or an official graduate
transcript(s). An official transcript is one bearing the university seal.

For the purpose of in-field degree qualification, the transcript must show
that the degree has been conferred and/or awarded.

If applicant’s advanced degree certificate is not on file with the county
public schools, the applicant must submit a copy of the certificate.

Applications shall be processed as nearly as possible in the order in
which they are received and in accordance with regulations and
guidelines established by the Task Force.

Applicants whose applications are disapproved because of a technicality
(e.g., required documentation not attached or application form
incomplete) shall be notified and afforded every reasonable opportunity
to complete the application appropriately.

Applications which require interpretation of the guidelines shall be
referred to the Task Force for disposition.

Applicants whose applications are disapproved shall be notified that they
may appeal the decision to the Task Force by resubmitted and supplying
such additional and germane information and/or documentation as will
be helpful in reaching a decision regarding the appeal. The decision of
the Task Force shall be final and binding on the parties.




                                A-8
                                      APPENDIX B
                                                                         Grievance #


                            OFFICIAL GRIEVANCE FORM


Name
Assignment Teacher
Work Location
Work Address

Home Address
Home Phone

                                          STEP 1

A Date cause of Grievance occurred:

B Article(s) and Section(s) alleged to have been violated:

C State Grievance:

D State Relief Sought:

E Disposition of immediate Supervisor:
  ___________________________________________________________________________
  ___________________________________________________________________________
  ___________________________________________________________________________
  ___________________________________________________________________________
  _____________________________________________

         ____________________                           _____________
         Immediate Supervisor                                Date

                                         STEP II

F.     Date submitted to Superintendent: _______________

     _____________________________         ___________________________________
          Signature of Grievant               Signature of BTU Representative


                                        Date Filed

Copies to: (1) Immediate Supervisor, (2) BTU, (3) Grievant



                                           B-1
                                              APPENDIX C
                              THE SCHOOL BOARD OF BROWARD COUNTY, FLORIDA

                              REQUEST FOR TRANSFER (INSTRUCTIONAL)
Name:
                  (Last                                        First                            MI)

SS#:                                                          Phone No: (         )

Address:
                  (Street                                       City                        State          Zip)

Current Work Location:

Current Assignment (grade level[s] and subject[s]):



Extra Curricular Activities/Coaching/Languages:



Desired assignment (grade level[s] and subject[s]) (You must be certified in the subject to be
considered):



Type of Transfer requested: (see reverse for definition)

 Guaranteed                       Regular                      Hardship         (you must list reason[s])




List school's name and location no. where you would like to transfer:
(Regular and Hardship may list only ten [10], Guaranteed may list ten [10])
         School                                    Loc. No.              School                                    Loc. No.
1.                                                                 6.
2.                                                                 7.
3.                                                                 8.
4.                                                                 9.
5.                                                                 10.

NO T E : Y o u w i ll b e c o n s i d e re d o n ly fo r th e s c h o o ls y o u h a v e li s te d . Y o u r tra n s fe r
a p p li c a ti o n c a n b e s u b m i tte d to I n s tru c ti o n a l S ta ffi n g a n y ti m e b e tw e e n J a n u a ry 1
a n d De c e m b e r 3 1 o f th e c u rre n t c a le n d a r y e a r. O n c e re c e i v e d i n I n s tru c ti o n a l
S ta ffi n g , y o u r re q u e s t c a n n o t b e m o d i fi e d .




Employee's Signature                                                                       Date


Principal's Signature                                                                      Date
12/9/97; 12/3/98-#4087
                                                         C-1
                               TRANSFERS
B.   Transfers

     1.   A transfer is defined as a permanent (more than one semester)
          change in the school, center, off-campus facility or other location
          at which the employee is regularly assigned. For purposes of this
          section a main building, any annex building(s), or portable
          classrooms shall be deemed to be part of the same school, center
          or off-campus facility irrespective of physical location provided that
          all such facilities have the same administrator.

          For Psychologists, Social Workers, Visiting Teacher, and other
          such employees who are assigned to an area (i.e. North, South,
          etc.), a transfer is defined as a change in the area.

          Reassignment as defined in Article 25-A(1) shall not constitute a
          transfer for the purposes of this agreement.

     2.   A transfer for an employee who is assigned to work in a program or
          activity which regularly or occasionally requires performing work at
          more than one school, center, off-campus facility or other location
          (e.g. store front schools or detention facilities) shall be deemed to
          occur only when the employee is moved to a program or activity
          which is under the supervision of a different principal or
          administrator.

     3.   The parties agree that prior to the effective date of any mergers,
          expansion or consolidation of programs or activities which require
          changes in employee work locations, the School Board will give
          written notice to the BTU. Upon request of the BTU, the BTU
          president and the Superintendent. or their respective designee, will
          meet and confer regarding the movement of the employee.

     4.   Employees who desire a transfer shall file a written statement with
          their principal of such desire on such form as set forth in annexed
          Appendix C, one copy of which shall be filed with the principal by
          the employee, one (1) copy filed with the Division of Human
          Resources and one (1) copy to be retained by the employee.

     5.   Posting of Vacancies:        Except in instances when voluntary
          transfers are approved by the Superintendent, the Superintendent
          shall post in all school offices and faculty rooms, all vacancies,
          including the anticipated vacancy list upon publication the subject
          area or grade level of the vacancy, the date the vacancy will occur,
          the qualifications required and the school in which the vacancy
          exists. A vacancy shall be deemed to have occurred when a full-
          time employee is sought to fill a full-time position. Such posting
          shall be made at least seven (7) working days before the vacancy is
          to be permanently filled.
                                    C-2
C.   Voluntary Transfers:

     1.   Transfer applications shall be provided by the District and may be
          submitted any time after January 1st for the following school year.
          Such applications shall remain active until the following December
          31st. Any employee who has received an end of the year overall
          evaluation of less than satisfactory for the current and/or previous
          school year is not eligible for transfer. Also, any teacher who is
          under a Performance Development Plan is ineligible for transfer.

          Applicants may request and specifically list six (6) schools to which
          they are interested in transferring.

     2.   The staff of the Division of Human Resources shall forward all
          such requests to the work locations requested by the applicant.

     3.   Hardship Transfers: For purposes of this section, a "hardship"
          shall be a situation when a teacher has completed a year of service
          with the District and:

          a.    travels 20 miles or more one-way, by the most direct route
                within Broward County limits to the assigned work location;
                or

          b.    has a serious medical and/or personal problem which can
                be substantiated by a Board selected physician or acceptable
                written explanation as determined by the Superintendent.
                Employees meeting the criterion in this section, may apply
                for a medical/personal problem transfer mid-year.

          c.    An employee who meets the "hardship" definition will be
                guaranteed an interview for a Board determined vacancy at
                one (1) of the ten (10) schools the employee selects.

     4.   Transfer Window:          Except for hardship transfers, voluntary
          transfer applicants who have requested a specific school for the
          following school year must all be considered before the affected
          principal can fill the vacancy. However, no transfer will be allowed
          after the close of work on the day before school starts for students
          each year. Factors to be considered by the principal include, but
          are not limited to:

          a.    required certification/qualifications for the position.

          b.    sending and receiving school's faculty racial ratio.

          c.    mutual agreement          of   employee    and    the     affected
                administrators.

                                    C-3
     d.    seniority of the affected employee.

5.   Guaranteed Transfers: Voluntary transfer applicants shall be
     granted a transfer if a vacancy exists for the following school year
     in one of ten (10) schools the employee selects based on the
     following conditions listed below. However, no transfer will be
     allowed after the close of work on the day before school starts for
     students each year.

     a.    Transfer        applicant         holds        the     required
           certification/qualifications for the position.

     b.    The affected teacher must have completed not less than
           fifteen (15) consecutive years in /her current school.

     c.    Not more than ten (10) percent (rounded up to the nearest
           whole number) of the bargaining unit members at a school
           will be eligible for a transfer under this section. The ten (10)
           percent shall be determined by the longest number of years
           of bargaining unit service at their current school. In case of
           a tie, Article Three, Section E, 3, c-d shall be utilized.

     d.    If more than one eligible teacher requests the same vacancy
           and they are certified for said position, it shall be awarded by
           bargaining unit seniority. Ties shall be broken pursuant to
           the provisions of Article Three, E, 3.

     e.    No school in the District shall be required to accept more
           than the following number of teachers under the provisions
           of this section number 5:
                  ESE, elementary                         =1
                  Middle                                  =2
                  Vocational Centers and High Schools     =3

     f.    The Superintendent can reject a transfer under unusual
           conditions as determined by the Superintendent such as the
           need for diverse staff, ESOL requirements and those
           supplements listed in Article 25, D, 5.

     g.    Transfers under this section shall be processed before
           voluntary transfers requested under section 4 above.

     h.    All transfers under this section shall stop on the close of
           work on the day before school starts for students each year.

6.   Superintendent Approval: After the day before school starts for
     students each year, the Superintendent may approve voluntary


                                C-4
     transfers under extenuating circumstances as determined by the
     Superintendent.

7.   Voluntary transfers shall not be processed until such time as the
     District has depleted the list of surplus teachers needing
     placement under Section D. below.




                             C-5
                                                APPENDIX D
                                            STUDENT REFERRAL FORM

I.      Student:                                                   Referred By:
        Student #:                                                 Date:
        Grade:                                                     Time:

        TO:              Administration                       Guidance                           ESE

II.     Reason For Referral:(1)




III.                                             Previous Teacher Action
                Student Conference          Progress Report           Detentions
               Guidance Referral           Parent Contact           Parent Conference
               Administrative Referral     Student/Team Conference  ESE/Specialist Referral
               Child Study/IAT Referral
        Other:


IV.     Consequences Of The Student’s Action
       As the affected student’s teacher, I recommend the following consequence(s) for this student’s
       offense



V.      Administration Action And/Or Comments
        Date of Action

        Detentions                                   External Suspension                     Student Conference
        Saturday School                              Internal Suspension                     Parent Contacted
        Social Worker Contacted                      Parent/Teacher Conference               Parent Conference
        Referred to Conflict Mediation               Referred to Guidance                    Work Detail

VI.     Consequences of Recurring Behavior:




VII. Student Signature:

        Administrator/Counselor Signature:

        Parent Signature Requested by Administration:             Yes No
(1) Please review the Student Conduct and Discipline Code Booklet for actions that lead to referrals.

    White Copy         Administrator File      Pink Copy:     Originator          Yellow Copy:     Parent/Guardian
#4620      1/97

                                                            D-1
                              APPENDIX E
                       TEACHERS SALARY SCHEDULE


     2009-20102011-2012 SCHOOL YEAR, Effective the first day of each
               employee’s 2009-20102011-2012 work calendar.


         Step                      Salary               Salary & Cafe
           1                      $39,000                   $39,300
           2                      $39,180                   $39,480
          *4                     *$39,475                  *$39,775
           4                      $39,475                   $39,775
           5                      $39,775                   $40,075
           6                      $40,075                   $40,375
           7                      $40,375                   $40,675
           8                      $40,714                   $41,014
          10                      $41,110                   $41,410
          11                      $42,150                   $42,450
          12                      $42,881                   $43,181
          13                      $43,440                   $43,740
         **15                   **$44,859                 **$45,159
          15                      $44,859                   $45,159
          16                      $45,820                   $46,120
          17                      $46,940                   $47,240
          18                      $48,081                   $48,381
          19                      $49,877                   $50,177
          20                      $53,377                   $53,677
          21                      $62,677                   $62,977
          22                      $71,250                   $71,550
*Elimination of step 3 and acceleration to Step 4.
**Elimination of step 14 and acceleration to Step 15.

1.     During the seventh year of the contract, employees who worked one (1)
       day more than half of their assigned work calendar in a school year shall
       advance one (1) step on the salary schedule, the first day of each
       employee’s subsequent work calendar.
       For the 2011-2012 school year, the District shall pay a $500 one-time
       bonus payment to current employees at the time of distribution.

2.     The parties acknowledge that for the 2009-2010, 2010-2011 and 2011-
       2012 fiscal years, there have been no step increases provided to
       employees. As a result, the years of teaching experience are no longer
       equivalent to the step placement of current employees. The parties agree
       that newly hired bargaining unit members shall receive the same credit
       for all experience that is provided under this agreement to current


                                      E-1
     employees as of the effective date of this contract for the 2011-2012 and
     subsequent fiscal years.

     Newly hired bargaining unit members shall receive credit for all verified
     teaching experience with the following placement on the salary schedule:

           2009-2010                                  2011-2012
     Years of Experience    Step                Years of Experience    Step
           0                  1                       0-3                1
           1                  2                       4                  2
           2                  4                                          *
           3                  4                       5                  4
           4                  5                       6                  4
           5                  6                       7                  5
           6                  7                       8                  6
           7                  8                       9                  7
           8                10                        10                 8
           9                10                                           *
           10               11                        11               10
           11               12                        12               10
           12               13                        13               11
           13               15                        14               12
           14               15                        15               13
           15               16                                           *
           16               17                        16               15
           17               18                        17               15
           18               19                        18               16
           19               20                        19               17
           20               21                        20               18
           21 or over       22                        21               19
                                                      22               20
                                                      23               21
                                                      24+              22

     *Employees were accelerated through step in years prior to 2011-2012.

3.   Salaries contained in the schedule for 2008-20092011-2012 shall
     become effective on the first day of each employees 2008-20092011-2012
     work calendar.

4.   The parties agree that employees shall not advance a step on the Salary
     Schedule unless the Collective Bargaining Agreement specifically calls for
     a step increase for the specific school year in question. If there is no
     Collective Bargaining Agreement in effect at the start of a school year,
     then step increases shall not be granted unless the subsequent contract
     specifically requires one. The parties agree that in 2008-2009, qualified


                                     E-2
     employees shall advance a step on the 2007-2008 salary schedule
     effective at the beginning of their school year regardless of whether or not
     a Collective Bargaining Agreement is in effect. Any employee who
     receives an unsatisfactory rating(s) on his/her annual evaluation shall
     become eligible for and shall receive payment for a negotiated step
     advancement retroactive to the date of salary schedule improvements
     after he/she has satisfactorily fulfills the terms of the professional
     development plan resulting from the unsatisfactory rating(s) and has
     been rated satisfactory. Until that occurs, the employee's salary shall
     remain frozen at the rate of pay for the previous year.

5.   Advanced Degree Stipends:

                                    Out-of-Field*         In-Field
     Master's Degree                   $2,600               $3,650
     Specialist Degree                 $5,000               $6,800
     Doctor’s Degree                   $7,000               $8,000
     Basic Incentive Award             $1,400               $2,000
     Advanced Incentive Award          $2,200               $2,700

     *Effective November 1, 1994, bargaining unit members may only qualify
     to earn degree's in-field. However, unit members who held out-of-field
     degrees and incentives on November 1, 1994, shall continue to receive
     the remuneration listed above in the column entitled "out-of-field" for as
     long as they work for the Board in this bargaining unit without a break
     in service. A Board approved leave is not considered a break in service.

6.   New Educator Professional Improvement Supplement:                  A three
     hundred dollar ($300) payment shall be payable to any annual contract
     teacher on Steps 1, 2 or 3 of the salary schedule who accumulates a
     minimum of six (6) college credits or the equivalent in-service coursework
     within any of the years that they are at Steps 1, 2, or 3 on the salary
     schedule. The courses should enable employees to become highly
     qualified or to improve their skills in their teaching field(s).

7.   Pursuant to Article 18 of the collective bargaining agreement, between
     the School Board of Broward County, Florida and the Broward Teachers
     Union,   instructional    personnel   who     demonstrate     outstanding
     performance are eligible to earn a supplement equal to at least 5% of the
     employee’s annual base salary. Eligibility is based upon meeting and
     maintaining satisfactory performance ratings and maintaining the
     requirements of either National Board Certification (NBC) or the Broward
     County Recognition Program (if ineligible to apply for NBC).         This
     program is in conformance with existing Florida statute, detailed in
     s1012.34, and Broward County School Board policy 4214, Professional
     Pathways.


                                     E-3
                                                         TEACHERS
                                           SUPPLEMENTARY PAY SCHEDULE - APPENDIX F
                                                         2011-2012

I.          High School
     A.     Department Chairperson

            Employees elected under the provisions of Article IX of this agreement shall receive $156 per
            employee in department, the number of department members to be determined by the principal
            as of October 1. (Minimum $717). Vocational department chairpersons shall also receive $156
            per non-bargaining unit instructional employee in their department who works a minimum of five
            (5) hours per day, five (5) days a week or a minimum of thirty (30) hours per week. Adult General
            Education Department chairperson shall also receive $156 per non-bargaining unit instructional
            employee in their department who works a minimum of five (5) hours per day, five days a week or
            a minimum of thirty (30) hours per week. For purposes of this section, Adult General Education
            shall be limited to the following centers: Hallandale Adult & Community Center, Whidden-Rogers
            Education Center, Dave Thomas Education Center, Wingate Oaks Center and the Whispering
            Pines School.

     B.     Guidance Directors                                                                                  $3,298
     C.     General*
         1. Yearbook (not part of class)                                                                        $1,579
         2. Newspaper (not part of class)                                                                       $1,579
         3. Student Government                                                                                  $1,579
         4. Debate                                                                                              $1,185
         5. Drama (per major production)                                                                        $788
         6. Newspaper (part of class)                                                                           $788
         7. Yearbook (part of class)                                                                            $788
         8. Literary Magazine                                                                                   $788
         9. Senior Class Sponsor                                                                                $788
        10. Other Class Sponsor                                                                                 $392
        11. Club Sponsor                                                                                        $392
        12. Forensics                                                                                           $1,076
        13. Academic Games                                                                                      $1,185
        14. Inservice Facilitator 0-50 units                                                                    $521
            (51 & up - $7.17 per unit)
            maximum                                                                                             $1,043
        15. Career Education                                                                                    $717
        16. Bus Duty (Based on number of buses supervised) 1-6                                                  $359
            7-12                                                                                                $717
            above 12                                                                                            $1,076
        17. Textbook Chairperson 1-700                                                                          $717
            (Based on student population of October FTE count) 701-1,400                                        $1,076
            1,401-above                                                                                         $1,434
        18. Media Center Director (Directing two or more bargaining unit employees)                             $1,185
        19. Sports for Athletics with Disabilities (4)                                                          $717
        20. Academic Competition (1)                                                                            $717
        21. National Honor Society                                                                              $1,185
        22. Media Center Coordinator (Directing one or more employees)                                          $359
        23. Florida Future Educators of America                                                                 $782
        24. Urban Teacher Academy Mentor                                                                        $750
     D.     Athletics*
       1. Yearly Positions
         a. Athletic Director (Boys & Girls)                                                                    $4,490
         b. Assistant Athletic Director (Boys & Girls)                                                          $2,169
         c. Head Trainer (Boys & Girls)                                                                         $2,604
         d. Assistant Trainer (Boys & Girls)                                                                    $1,735
     NOTE: Trainer position may be divided into three (3) sport seasons, Fall - 40%, Winter - 30%, and Spring
            - 30%.
         e. Intramurals                                                                                         $1,076
       2. Head Coaches
         a. Head Football                                                                                       $3,038
         b. Head Basketball(Boys' Team)                                                                         $2,604
            (Girls' Team)                                                                                       $2,604
         c. Head Track (Boys' Team)                                                                             $2,169
            (Girls' Team)                                                                                       $2,169
         d. Head Baseball                                                                                       $2,169
         e. Head Softball                                                                                       $2,169



                                                                   F-1
                                                               TEACHERS
                                                 SUPPLEMENTARY PAY SCHEDULE - APPENDIX F
                                                               2011-2012

          f. Head Soccer                                                                                           $2,169
         g. Head Wrestling                                                                                         $2,169
         h. Head Cheerleader                                                                                       $2,169
          i. Head Tennis(Boys' Team)                                                                               $1,302
             (Girls' Team)                                                                                         $1,302
      3. Head Coaches - Two (2) Teams
         a. Head Cross-Country (Boys' & Girls' Team)                                                               $1,579
* When in excess of regular teaching load and recommended by the principal.
(1) The six (6) supplements that are available for each high school and middle school are computer,
mathematics science, social studies, academic games and language art competition. Elementary schools may
select one of these six (6).
(4) The selected teacher may receive this designated amount per sport, per season, with a maximum of three
(3) sports.
           b. Head Golf (Boys' & Girls' Team)                                                                      $1,579
           c. Head Drill Team                                                                                      $1,735
           d. Head Volleyball (Varsity & J.V. Team)                                                                $2,366
           e. Head Swimming (Boys' & Girls' Team)                                                                  $2,761
            f. Gymnastics (Boys' & Girls' Team)                                                                    $1,579
           g. Water Polo (Boys' & Girls' Team)                                                                     $1,579
           h. Cheerleader (Varsity & J.V.)                                                                         $2,761
            i. Girls Head Flag Football (Varsity & J.V. Teams)                                                     $2,366
            j. Head Tennis(Boys & Girls Team)                                                                      $1,579
         4. Assistant Coaches
           a. Assistant Football                                                                                   $2,169
           b. Assistant Basketball                                                                                 $1,735
           c. Assistant Wrestling                                                                                  $1,735
           d. Assistant Cheerleader                                                                                $1,302
           e. Assistant Track                                                                                      $1,735
            f. Assistant Swimming                                                                                  $1,302
           g. Assistant Softball                                                                                   $1,302
           h. Assistant Soccer                                                                                     $1,302
            i. Assistant Baseball                                                                                  $1,302
         5. If a school has only one (1) team in the following sports, the head coach's supplement would be as
               follows:
           a. Swimming                                                                                             $1,973
           b. Volleyball (Varsity)                                                                                 $1,579
           c. Volleyball (J. V.)                                                                                   $1,185
           d. Golf                                                                                                 $1,185
           e. Cross Country                                                                                        $1,185
            f. Water Polo                                                                                          $1,185
           g. Gymnastics                                                                                           $1,185
           h. Girls Flag Football (Varsity)                                                                        $1,579
            i. Girls Flag Football (Junior Varsity)                                                                $1,185
      E.       Music*
           1. Band Director                                                                                        $2,761
           2. Vocal Director/Orchestra                                                                             $2,152
           3. Music Assistant                                                                                      $1,185
      F.       The principal may recommend additional task assignments to the Area Superintendent for
               approval which will improve the school's program and/or operations, and will fall in the range of
               $359-717. Supplements may be divided by employees provided that the amount of time required
               for the position is divided proportionately.

II.   Middle School
      A.    Department Chairperson and/or Team Leader
             Employees elected under the provisions of Article IX of this agreement shall receive $156 per
             employee in department or on team, the number of department members to be determined by the
             principal as of October 1. (Minimum $717.)
      B.      Guidance Director                                                                                    $2,886
      C.      General*
           1. Student Government                                                                                   $1,185
           2. Academic Games                                                                                       $1,185
           3. Junior Honor Society                                                                                 $392
           4. Inservice Facilitator 0-50 units                                                                     $521


                                                                     F-2
                                                          TEACHERS
                                            SUPPLEMENTARY PAY SCHEDULE - APPENDIX F
                                                          2011-2012

            (51 & up - $7.17 per unit)
            maximum                                                                                               $1,043
         5. Career Education                                                                                      $717
         6. Bus Duty (Based on number of buses supervised) 1-6                                                    $358
            7-12                                                                                                  $717
            above 12                                                                                              $1,076
         7. Textbook Chairperson 1-700                                                                            $717
            (Based on student population of October FTE counts) 701-1,400                                         $1,076
            1,401-above                                                                                           $1,434
         8. Media Center Director (Directing two [2] or more bargaining unit employees)                           $1,185
         9. Sports for Athletics with Disabilities (4)                                                            $717
        10. Media Center Coordinator (Directing one [1] or more employees)                                        $358
        11. Florida Future Educators of America                                                                   $782
     D.     Athletics*
         1. Athletics Director                                                                                    $1,995
         2. Cross-Country (Boys' & Girls' Team)                                                                   $1,302
         3. Wrestling                                                                                             $1,302
         4. Tennis (Boys' & Girls' Team)                                                                          $1,302
         5. Softball (Boys' & Girls' Team)                                                                        $1,302
         6. Basketball (Boys' Team)                                                                               $1,302
            (Girls' Team)                                                                                         $1,302
         7. Track (Boys' Team)                                                                                    $1,302
            (Girls' Team)                                                                                         $1,302
         8. Field Events                                                                                          $1,302
         9. Swimming (Boys' & Girls' Team)                                                                        $1,302
* When in excess of regular teaching load and recommended by the principal.
(4) The selected teacher may receive this designated amount per sport, per season, with a maximum of three
(3) sports.
          10. Volleyball (Boys' Team)                                                                             $1,302
              (Girls' Team)                                                                                       $1,302
          11. Gymnastics (Girls' Team)                                                                            $1,302
          12. Soccer                                                                                              $1,302
          13. Cheerleaders                                                                                        $1,302
          14. Intramurals                                                                                         $1,302
       E.     Music*
           1. Band or Orchestra                                                                                   $1,185
           2. Vocal Director                                                                                      $1,185
           3. Music Assistant                                                                                     $788
       F.     Academic Competition (1)                                                                            $717
       G.     The principal may recommend additional task assignments to the Area Superintendent for
              approval which will improve the school's program and/or operations, and will fall in the range of
              $359-717. Supplements may be divided by employees provided that the a Supplements may be
              divided by employees provided that the amount of time required for the position is divided
              proportionately.
III.   Elementary School
       A.     Grade Level Chairperson and/or Team Leader
              Employees elected under the provisions of Article IX of this agreement shall receive $156 per
              employee in grade level or on team. (Minimum $717.)
       B.      General*
            1. Safety Patrol                                                                                      $359
            2. Inservice Facilitator 0-50 units                                                                   $521
               (51 & up - $7.17 per unit)
               maximum                                                                                            $1,043
            3. Career Education                                                                                   $430
            4. Bus Duty 1-6                                                                                       $359
               7-12                                                                                               $717
               above 12                                                                                           $1,075
            5. Textbook Chairperson 1-700                                                                         $717
               (Based on student population as of October FTE count) 701-1,400                                    $1,075
               1,401 - up                                                                                         $1,434
            6. Sports for Athletics with Disabilities (4)                                                         $717
            7. Environmental/Science Coordinator                                                                  $458
            8. Academic Competition (1)                                                                           $717


                                                                    F-3
                                                              TEACHERS
                                                SUPPLEMENTARY PAY SCHEDULE - APPENDIX F
                                                              2011-2012

         9. Media Center Coordinator (Directing one [1] or more employees)                                                   $359
      C.    The principal may recommend additional task assignments to the Area Superintendent for
            approval which will improve the school's program and/or operations, and will fall in the range of
            $359-717. Supplements may be divided by employees provided that the a Supplements may be
            divided by employees provided that the amount of time required for the position is divided
            proportionately.
IV.   Special**
      A.    School Social Worker                                                                                             $2,835
      B.    Psychologists                                                                                                    $3,815
      C.    Intervention Team Leader                                                                                         $2,521
      D.    Instructional Coach (if 2nd beginning teacher, additional $550)                                                  $1,161
      E.    School Liaison                                                                                                   $638
      F.    Professional Development Network                                                                                 $652
      G.    ESE District & Area Monitor/Specialist                                                                           $1,174
      H.    ROTC:
         1. Instructor in Charge                                                                                             $1,305
         2. Instructor Responsible for Equipment                                                                             $652
      I.    Physical Education Networking Team (nine [9] people)                                                             $1,956
            The district will select two (2) additional employee to receive supplments to provide technical
            assistance at the district level to the teams working in ESE Centers.
      J.    Broward School Board At-Risk Certification (5)                                                                   $2,217
      K.    Guild Teachers (Mentoring other teachers for a total of fifty (50) hours                                         $870
            (NBPTS teachers who are mentoring under the state program are not eligible for this stipend)
            (If NBPTS teachers who are not mentoring under the state program are eligible for this stipend)
* When in excess of regular teaching load and recommended by the principal.
** When in excess of regular duty hours and recommended by the supervisor.

(1) The eight (8) supplements that are available for each high school and middle school are computer,
mathematics, science, social studies, academic games, ESOL Academic Competition Coordinator, Foreign
Lanaugage Academic Competition Coordinator, and language art competition. Elementary schools may select
one of these eight (8).
(2) There shall be one (1) of each of these supplements within the district with the exception of the Future
Business Leaders of America for which there shall be two (2) supplements.
(4) The selected teacher may receive this designated amount per sport, per season, with a maximum of three
(3) sports.
(5) Effective with the commencement of the second year of this contract, the actual amount of the supplement
will be prorated by the time spent in direct instruction on a dropout prevention program. For example, a
teacher with five (5) periods of dropout prevention will receive the full $2,217. A teacher with three (3) periods
of dropout prevention will earn 3/5 of the supplement ($1,330).
      L.     Southeastern Consortium for Minorities in Engineering (SECME) (6)                                               $1,462
      M.     Rover - Year Round Education (Hallandale Elem. only)                                                            $717
      N.     Assistant Grade Level Chairperson - Year Round Education (Hallandale Elem. only). Employees
             elected under the provisions of Articled IX of this agreement shall receive $156 per employee in
             department, the number of department members to be determined by the principal as of October
             1. (Minimum $717.)
      O.     National Board for Professional Teaching Standards                                                              The greater of 5% of
             (Note: Teachers shall receive this supplement for as long as they hold their national certification.)           base salary or 2,438
      P.     Broward County Recognition Program (BCRP)                                                                       5% of base salary
      Note: Teachers shall receive this supplement for as long as they hold their local recognition certification.
      Q.     ESE Specialist                                                                                                  $935
      R.     Speech/Language Pathologist                                                                                     $935
      S.     Family Counselor                                                                                                $1,100
      T.     Speech Language Pathologist (National Clinical Certification)              (paid in addition to item R above)   $1,100
      U.     Testing Coordinator                                                                                             $1,100
      V.     ESOL Coordinator
             1-75 ESOL Students                                                                                              $675
             76-150 ESOL Students                                                                                            $900
             151 or more ESOL Students                                                                                       $1,150
      W.     Itinerant Visually Impaired Teachers                                                                            $3,000
V.    Vocational Technical & Adult Education* (2)
      A.     Future Farmers of America                                                                                       $717
      B.     Future Business Leaders of America                                                                              $717
      C.     Cooperative Education Club of FL                                                                                $717


                                                                          F-4
                                                            TEACHERS
                                              SUPPLEMENTARY PAY SCHEDULE - APPENDIX F
                                                            2011-2012

      D.     Health Occupation, Student Assoc.                                                                   $717
      E.     Florida Homemakers Assoc/Home Economics Related Occup                                               $717
      F.     Vocational Industrial Clubs of America                                                              $717
      G.     Distributive Education Clubs of America                                                             $717
      H.     Florida Industrial Arts Student Association                                                         $717
VI.   District Coordination of Academic Games* (3)
      A.     Academic Games Competition:
          1. Elementary                                                                                          $652
          a. North Area                                                                                          $261
           b. North Central Area                                                                                 $261
           c. South Area                                                                                         $261
           d. South Central Area                                                                                 $261
           2. Middle                                                                                             $717
           3. High                                                                                               $717
      B.      Computer Competition:
           1. Elementary                                                                                         $717
           2. Middle                                                                                             $717
           3. High                                                                                               $717
      C.      Language Arts Competition:
           1. Elementary                                                                                         $717
           2. Middle                                                                                             $717
           3. High                                                                                               $717
      D.      Mathematics Competition:
           1. Elementary                                                                                         $717
           2. Middle                                                                                             $717
           3. High                                                                                               $717
      E.      Science Competition:
           1. Elementary                                                                                         $717
           2. Middle                                                                                             $717
           3. High                                                                                               $717
      F.      Social Studies Competition:
           1. Elementary                                                                                         $717
           2. Middle                                                                                             $717
           3. High                                                                                               $717
      G.      Foreign Language Competition:
           1. Elementary                                                                                         $717
           2. Middle                                                                                             $717
           3. High                                                                                               $717

* When in excess of regular teaching load and recommended by the principal.
** When in excess of regular duty hours and recommended by the supervisor.

(2) There shall be one (1) of each of these supplements within the district with the exception of the Future
Business Leaders of America for which there shall be two (2) supplements.
(3) These are districtwide supplements and there shall be one for each of the supplements listed in Section VI
in the district. The County Curriculum Council may recommend bargaining unit members to fill these
positions to the Deputy Superintendent, Educational Programs and Human Resource Department.

(6) SECME supplements are available to high schools and middle schools who qualify for the SECME Program
and are approved by the Board pursuant to district guidelines.




                                                                   F-5
                         APPENDIX G
              RETIREMENT TASK FORCE COMMITTEE


Upon ratification, both parties agree to establish a special Retirement
Task Force Committee for the 2001-2002 school year.

The President of the BTU (designee) and the Superintendent (designee)
shall serve as co-chairpersons.

The President of the BTU (designee) and the Superintendent (designee)
shall each select five people to serve on this committee.

The purpose of the committee is to address issues related to establishing
a Early Retirement Program.

Committee discussions will be concluded as soon as possible and
recommendations shall be considered.




                                  G-1
                                APPENDIX HG

                       DEVELOPMENTAL PROTOCOL

a.   The precept is: Flexibility for both principal and teacher.

b.   The process should be professionally oriented.

c.   The relationship should be rich with trust.

d.   Principal can visit the classroom at anytime and make observations at
     any time.

e.   The assumption is that everything is satisfactory unless the teacher is
     told otherwise.

f.   The principal can move the teacher into Documentation any time with
     written explanation as to why it is happening.

g.   There should be some kind of an audit trail. The audit trail can include
     minutes of a meeting, goal statements, notes on a calendar, references to
     future meetings, exchange of memos, etc. The notion is to provide an
     audit trail for Developmental phase. The challenge is to have the
     principal feel comfortable with signing off on this form, and being
     satisfied that the developmental process has taken hold in the school
     and with the teacher.

h.   Developmental activities may include individual and team projects,
     introduction of learning or training of new instructional strategies,
     coaching between and among faculty, development of new instructional
     strategies (hopefully, research based strategies), pure observation and
     assistance, demonstration projects, development of portfolios (written or
     video), development of written materials, oral agreements on the part of
     the principal and the teacher, etc.

i.   Developmental activities essentially should meet the professional
     developmental needs of teachers as well as contribute to the objectives of
     the school as stated in its strategic plan.

ASSESSMENT CRITERIA

1.   Instructional Planning




                                     G-1
     a.    Develops lesson plans and selects instructional materials and
           activities which reflect the district’s curriculum scope and
           sequence and identified learner needs.
     b.    Identifies and sequences content.
     c.    Develops lesson plans which reflect the prerequisite knowledge,
           skill, and readiness of students. Specifies learner objectives and
           relates these objectives to the instructional activity.
     d.    Relates instructional elements such as content, materials,
           activities, format, and goals to identified student needs.
     e.    Specifies the steps, sequence, and pacing of student activities
           appropriate to their needs and the content area.

2.   Lesson Management
     a.   Orients students to classwork, specifies purposes of activities and
          how they relate to the objectives or learner outcomes.
     b.   Prepares the classroom, materials, and equipment in preparation
          for the presentation of the lesson.
     c.   Transitions from one activity or topic to another in accordance with
          lesson plans and learner needs.

3.   Lesson Presentation
     a.   Selects and uses appropriate instructional techniques, including
          available materials and technology which support learning of the
          specific types of knowledge or skills.
     b.   Emphasizes what is important to remember in a lesson.
     c.   Uses different types of questions to obtain desired learner
          responses.
     d.   Asks questions which are clear and require students to reflect
          before responding.
     e.   Recognizes student responses to questions and provides feedback.
     f.   Gives clear, brief and explicit directions and checks for
          understanding.
     g.   Circulates about the room as students engage in seatwork and
          assists students as needed.
     h.   Reviews the student’s work and provides timely and specific
          written or verbal feedback.

4.   Student Performance Evaluation
     a.   Selects or develops a variety of assessments and formats related to
          specific learning objectives.

     b.    Instructs student in test-taking techniques.

     c.    Creates a positive test-taking atmosphere.




                                    G-2
      d.    Monitors students during testing.

      e.    Grades tests accurately and objectively. Uses test data to diagnose
            individual student strengths and weaknesses.

      f.    Monitors student progress in attaining achievement standards and
            objectives established by the school, innovation zone, area and
            District.

      g.    Ongoing teacher documentation of student achievement gains
            through norm-referenced and criterion-referenced standardized
            test results where available and at least one of the other following
            assessment strategies selected by the teacher:                   student
            performance demonstrations, teacher observations, and portfolios
            of student work. Where the above referenced standardized student
            tests are not available, the principal will also select one of the other
            assessment strategies listed above. The parties recognize that
            standardized test scores can be influenced by a number of factors
            outside the school setting such as student mobility rates, the
            number of special needs students, parental support, etc.

The terms used above are defined as follows:

Portfolio - The teacher shall select a collection of samples of student work and
student test results reflecting achievement of identified student performance
standards, as defined by the School District Standards of Service and
Curriculum Frameworks.

Norm-Referenced Test - This type of test compares a group of students to a
similar group of students, usually by age or grade level. These tests are
usually field tested. Examples of such tests include Standford Achievement
Test (grades 2-9), Woodcock-Johnson (ESE students).

Criterion-Referenced Test - This type of test measures student achievement
(individual or group) against a measured standard, not other groups of
students. Examples include Florida Writing Assessment (grades 4, 8, and 10),
Advanced Placement Tests (grades 11 and 12), tests developed by teachers
administered weekly or monthly, etc.

5.    Communication
      a.  Speaks in a clear, audible, well-modulated voice.

      b.    Demonstrates basic mechanics of writing: spelling, capitalization,
            and punctuation.




                                       G-3
     c.   Uses correct grammar in written and oral communications.

     d.   Presents connected or associated ideas and thoughts.

     e.   Expresses interest and excitement through verbal and nonverbal
          behavior.

     f.   Communicates learner status and progress to parents in order to
          maintain a positive collaborative relationship.     Additionally,
          communicates learner status and progress to the student, parents,
          and to other professionals.

6.   Classroom Management
     a.    Creates and maintains an organized and pleasant working
           environment in the classroom.

     b.   Promotes positive student self concepts.

     c.   Encourages students to participate and contribute to class
          activities.

     d.   Establishes an environment conducive to positive peer interaction.

     e.   Identifies individual social emotional and/or physical needs that
          might affect school success.

     f.   Uses appropriate procedures to refer individual students for
          further assessment or intervention by other professionals.

7.   Behavior Management
     a.   Establishes and implements specific behavioral and procedural
          expectations, rules, and consequences.

     b.   Demonstrates an awareness of what all students are doing.

     c.   Stops inappropriate behavior before it spreads or becomes more
          serious.

     d.   Reinforces positive student behavior.

8.   Records Management
     a.   Maintains an organized, accurate, and up-to-date lesson plan and
          grade book.

     b.   Maintains accurate attendance records



                                   G-4
      c.   Maintains a system for recording individual student’s knowledge
           and skills progress in a subject area.

9.    Subject Matter Knowledge
      a.   Presents accurate information.

      b.   Recognizes and promotes the relationship of the subject with the
           school’s curriculum.

      c.   Appropriately organizes and presents content for the specific
           subject.

10.   Other Professional Competencies

      Performance will be assessed in relation to other professional
      competencies, expectations, and requirements set forth in Florida
      Statutes, State Board of Education Rules, School Board of Broward
      County Policies, applicable labor contracts, and any other applicable
      regulations.




                                    G-5
            DOCUMENTATION PHASE

                Sequence of Events
Employees Assigned to the Beginning Teacher Program




                Structured Events
               as determined by the

            Beginning Teacher Program

                    Including:

                     orienting
                    observing
                   conferencing
                     assessing




         Annual Assessment Conference
  And completion of IPAS form and filing of records




                     G-6
                        DOCUMENTATION PHASE

                           Sequence of Events
                Annual Contract Employment Not Assigned
                   To the Beginning Teacher Program




                           Employee Orientation


   Data Collection Activities

   Informal Non-Classroom
        Observations

Informal Classroom Observations
                                              Post Observation Conference
                                                    following each
Formal Classroom Observations
    (one required during
                                             Formal Classroom Observation
        First Semester)

  Review of Records and Print
           Material
      Review of Portfolio


       If Performance is

    “Needs Improvement”                      Final Assessment Conference
             or
      “Unsatisfactory”                            Completion of form
                                                   Filing of records
             Then a
 Professional Development Plan
   is prepared, implemented,
     discussed, documented,
          and reviewed




                                  G-7
                              DOCUMENTATION PHASE

                               Sequence of Events
         Professional Services Contract/Continuing Contract Employees
               Assigned to this phase based on recertification cycle




                                  Employee Orientation




     Data Collection Activities

     Informal Non-Classroom
          Observations

 Informal Classroom Observations                     Post Observation Conference
                                                           following each
  Formal Classroom Observations
          (one required)
                                                    Formal Classroom Observation
    Review of Records and Print
             Material

        Review of Portfolio




         If Performance is

      “Needs Improvement”
               or                                    Final Assessment Conference
        “Unsatisfactory”
                                                         completion of form
               then a                                      filing of records
  Professional Development Plan

is prepared, implemented, discussed,
            documented,
            and reviewed




                                         G-8
                                DEVELOPMENT PHASE

                             Sequence of Events
                 Continuing Contract Employees NOT assigned
         to the DOCUMENTATION phase based on recertification cycle




                                Employee Orientation




   Data Collection Activities                           Optional Involvement on

    Informal Non-classroom                             Professional Educator Teams
         Observations
                                                               Team plans
Informal Classroom Observations
                                                          based on school needs
Formal Classroom Observations                             and individual needs
          (optional)
                                                             Team meetings
  Review of Records and Print
           Material                                       Product development

      Review of Portfolio                                 Product presentation




        If Performance is

     “Needs Improvement”
              or
       “Unsatisfactory”
                                                       Final Assessment Conference
     then the employee is
        assigned to the                                     Completion of form
   DOCUMENTATION Phase                                       Filing of records
       and removed from
  Professional Educator Teams



                                        G-9
              Performance Improvement Activities

employees assigned based on identified performance deficiency(s)




                     Formal Observation




          Formal Conference and Plan Developed




       Performance Development Plan Implemented




                     Formal Observation




                     Formal Observation




Process continued                       Assessment Conference
                                              conducted




                             G-10
Broward County Public School District, Florida                                                                                                 Instructional Personnel Assessment System
                                                                                            School Year:
Employee:                                                                                                                                   Type of Assessment                            S - Satisfactory


School:                                                       SSAN:                         Contract Status:                                Development:                    Rating        N - Needs Improvement
                                                                                                                                                                            Scale
Data Collection Dates:                                                                      Assessor:                                       Documentation                                 U -Unsatisfactory


Performance Area                                                                    Instructional Personnel Performance Indicators                                                                                  Rating

                                       Develops lesson plans and selects instructional            Develops lesson plans which reflect the                   Relates instructional elements such as content,
                                       materials and activities which reflect the                 prerequisite knowledge, skills, and readiness             materials, activities, format, and goals to
                                       district's curriculum scope and sequence and               of students.                                              identified student needs.
                                       identify learners' needs.

Instructional
Planning
                                       Identifies and sequences content.                          Specifies learner objectives and relates these to         Specifies the steps, sequence, and pacing of
                                                                                                  the instructional activity.                               student activities appropriate to their needs and
                                                                                                                                                            the content area.

Lesson Management                      Orients students to classwork, specifies                   Prepares the classroom, materials, and                    Transitions from one activity or topic to another
                                       purposes of activities and relationship to the             equipment for the presentation of the lesson.             in accordance with lesson plans and learners'
                                       objectives.                                                                                                          needs.

                                       Selects and uses appropriate instructional                 Emphasizes what is important to remember.                 Asks questions which are clear and require
                                       techniques including available materials and                                                                         students to reflect before responding.
                                       technology which support learning of the
                                       specific types of knowledge or skills.

Lesson
Presentation
                                                                                                  Uses different types of questions to obtain               Gives clear, brief, and explicit directions and
                                                                                                  desired learner responses.                                checks for understanding.
                                       Circulates about the room as
                                       students engage in seatwork and assists
                                                                                                  Recognizes students' responses to questions               Reviews student work and provides timely and
                                       students as needed.
                                                                                                  and provides feedback.                                    specific written or verbal feedback.

                                       Selects or develops a variety of assessments               Uses test data to diagnose individual student             Grades tests accurately and objectively.
                                       and formats related to specific learning                   strengths and weaknesses.
                                       objectives.
                                       Creates a positive test-taking atmosphere.                 Monitors students during testing.                         Instructs students in test-taking techniques.
Student
Performance
                                       Monitors student progress in attaining achievement standards and objectives established by the school, innovation zone, area and District.
Evaluation
                                       Ongoing teacher documentation of student achievement gains through norm - referenced and criterion-referenced standardized test results where
                                       available and at least one of the other following assessment strategies selected by the teacher: student performance demonstrations, teacher
                                       observations and portfolios of student work. Where the above referenced standardized student tests are not available, the principal will also select
                                       one of the other assessment strategies listed above. The parties recognize that standardized test scores can be influenced by a number of factors
                                       outside the school setting such as student mobility rates, the number of special need students, parental support, etc.

                                       Speaks in a clear, audible, well modulated voice.                Uses correct grammar in written and oral                      Presents connected or associated ideas
                                                                                                        communications.                                               and thoughts.
Communication
                                       Expresses interest and excitement through verbal                 Demonstrates basic mechanics of writing: spelling,            Communicates learner status and
                                       and nonverbal behavior.                                          capitalization, and punctuation.                              progress to the student, parents, and to
                                                                                                                                                                      other professionals.

                                       Creates and maintains an organized and pleasant                  Encourages students to participate and contribute to          Promotes positive student self-
                                       working environment in the classroom                             class activities.                                             concepts.
Classroom
Management
                                       Identifies individual social, emotional and/or                   Establishes an environment conducive to positive              Uses appropriate procedures to refer
                                       physical needs that might affect school success.                 peer interaction.                                             individual students for further
                                                                                                                                                                      assessment or intervention by other
                                                                                                                                                                      professionals.

                                       Establishes and implements specific behavioral and               Demonstrates an awareness of what all students are
Behavior                                                                                                doing.                                                        Reinforces positive student
Management                             procedural expectations, rules, and consequences.                                                                              behavior.
                                                                                                        Stops inappropriate behavior before it spreads or
                                                                                                        becomes more serious.

Records Management                                                                                                                                                    Maintains a system for recording
                                       Maintains an organized, accurate, and up-to-date                 Maintains accurate attendance records.
                                                                                                                                                                      individual student's knowledge and
                                       lesson plan and grade book.
                                                                                                                                                                      skills progress in a subject area.

Subject Matter Knowledge                                                                                Recognizes and promotes the relationship of the               Appropriately organizes and presents
                                       Presents accurate information.                                   subject with the school's curriculum.                         content for the specific subject.

Professional Competencies                   Complies with Florida Statutes, State Board of Education Rules, School Board of Broward County Policies, and other applicable regulations.

Overall Performance Rating:                                       S-Satisfactory                            N-Needs Improvement
                                                                                                            (Annual contract teachers only)
                                                                                                                                                                  U-Unsatisfactory
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Comments by the assessor:


                                                                                           Assessor                                                                                                          Date

Comments by the employee:


                                                                                           Employee                                                                                                          Date
The employee's signature will indicate only that he/she has read this form and will not necessarily indicate agreement with its contents.
#4311
W19992




                                                                                                           G-11
Broward County Public School District, Florida                                                            Instructional Personnel Assessment System

Employee:                                                          School Year:                    Type of Assessment                             S - Satisfactory

School:                                  SSAN:                     Contract Status:                Development:                        Rating      N - Needs Improvement
                                                                                                                                       Scale
Data Collection Dates:                                             Assessor:                       Documentation                                   U -Unsatisfactory

Performance Area                                          School Media Specialist Performance Indicators                                           Rating
                      Effectively utilizes the Library         Establishes written policies and         Provide optimal utilization of school
Planning              Media Advisory Committee to              procedures to achieve the goals of       and district media resources and
                      develop short and long range goals       the media program.                       facilities on a fair and equitable basis
                      and to evaluate the library media                                                 to students and staff.
                      program.
                      Promotes teacher and student             Integrates a sequential program of       Provides inservice training to promote
                      awareness of media resources             library media skills instruction into    effective use of resources and services.
                                                               the curriculum in cooperation with
                                                               teachers.
                      Orients students to media center         Prepares media center materials and      Provides transitions from one activity
Lesson                work and specifies purposes of           equipment in preparation for the         or topic to another in accordance with
Management            activities and relationship to           presentation or activity.                lesson plans and learner needs.
                      objectives.
                      Selects and uses instructional           Emphasizes what is important to          Asks questions which are clear and
                      techniques which support                 remember.                                require students to reflect before
                                                                                                        responding.
Lesson                learning of the specific types of        Uses different types of questions to     Gives clear, brief, and explicit
Presentation          knowledge or skills.                     obtain desired participants'             directions and checks for
                                                               responses.                               understanding.
                      Circulates about the media center        Recognizes students' responses to        Reviews student work and provides
                      and assists participants as needed.      questions and provides feedback.         timely and specific written or verbal
                                                                                                        feedback.
                      Ongoing documentation of strategies and direct services which focus on improving student achievement and helping
                      students become self-directed learners. This will include, but not be limited to: providing instruction to foster
Student
                      competence in acquiring and using information and ideas, and in evaluating information resources; stimulating
Performance
                      interest in reading and appreciation of literature through group instruction and individual guidance; providing
                      intellectual and physical access to materials in multiple formats; and working with other educators to design and carry
                      out learning experiences to meet the needs of individual students.
                                                                                                        Promotes positive student self
                      Participates in the selection,           Encourages students to                   concepts.
                      training, supervision and evaluation     participate and contribute to media      Creates and maintain an organized and
                      of library media personnel.              center learning activities.              pleasant working environment.

Media Center
Management
                      Identifies individual social,            Use appropriate procedures to refer      Establishes an environment conducive
                      emotional, and/or physical needs         individual students for further          to positive peer interaction.
                      that might affect school success.        assessment or intervention by other
                                                               professionals.
                      Establishes and implements specific      Demonstrates an awareness of             Stops inappropriate behavior before it
Behavior              behavioral and                           participant's activities.                spreads to becomes
Management            procedural expectations, rules and                                                more serious.
                                                               Reinforces positive behavior.
                      consequences.
Records               Maintains organized and up-to-date       Maintains accurate user statistics of    Shows evidence of proper record
Management            records of media center activities.      media center use.                        keeping practices.
                      Speaks in a clear, audible, well         Uses correct grammar in written and      Presents connected or associated ideas
                      modulated voice.                         oral communications.                     and thoughts.
Communication
                      Expresses interest and excitement        Demonstrates basic mechanics of          Develops rapport with students staff
                      through verbal and nonverbal             writing: spelling, capitalization, and   and the community to promote the
                      behavior.                                punctuation.                             library media program.
                      Plans for changing needs and             Maintains effective working              Develops a collection that support
                      improvements in program,                 relationships with students, faculty,    needs of the curriculum and recognizes
                      collection, and facilities with          media staff, district staff, and         individual levels of ability and
                      administration and faculty.              community members.                       interests.
                                                               Analyze school goals and objectives      Prepares and submits accurate and
Subject Matter
                      Shows evidence of professional           and recorded data to plan media          punctual reports.
Knowledge •
                                                               program, resources, and services.
Media Program         growth.
                      Develops the budget for equipment,       Demonstrates effectiveness in            Follows standard operating procedures
                      materials, and supplies according to     assisting students and teachers          for selecting, organizing, and
                      school, state and federal regulations.   locate and utilize resources.            circulating materials and equipment.
Student               Selects or develops a variety of assessments and formats related to specific Uses test data as needed to diagnose
Evaluation            learning objectives.                                                         students' strengths and weaknesses.
Professional          Complies with Florida Statutes, State Board of Education Rules, School Board of Broward County Policies, and other
Competencies                                                          applicable regulations.

Overall Performance Rating:                       S-Satisfactory                  N-Needs Improvement                         U-Unsatisfactory                          
                                                                                  (Annual contract teachers only)
Comments by the assessor:


                                                                     Assessor                                                                                  Date
Comments by the employee:


                                                                    Employee                                                                                   Date
The employee's signature will indicate only that he/she has read this form and will not necessarily indicate agreement with its contents.
#4312                                                                                                                                                                 W19993
2/98




                                                                                  G-12
Broward County Public School District, Florida                                                                        Instructional Personnel Assessment System

Employee:                                                                       School Year:                           Type of Assessment                               S - Satisfactory

School:                                               SSAN:                     Contract Status:                       Development:                            Rating    N - Needs

                                                                                                                                                                         Improvement
                                                                                                                                                               Scale
Data Collection Dates:                                                          Assessor:                              Documentation                                     U -Unsatisfactory

Performance Area                                            Student/Support Services Performance Indicators                                                                 Rating
                                  Develops plans and selects materials             Develops plans which reflect the                Relates content, materials,
                                  and activities which reflect the                 prerequisite knowledge, skills, and             activities, format, and goals to
                                  identified participant's needs.                  readiness of participants.                      identified participants needs.
Planning
                                                                                                                                   Specifies the steps, sequence, and
                                                                                   Specifics participant's objectives and          pacing of participant activities
                                  Identifies and sequences content.
                                                                                   relates these to the activity.                  appropriate to their needs.
                                  Orients participants to tasks specifies          Prepares materials and equipment in             Transitions from one activity or
Organization                      purposes of tasks and relationship to            preparation for the presentation                topic to another.
                                  the objectives.                                  activity.
                                                                                   Emphasizes what is important to                 Asks questions which are clear
                                  Selects and uses techniques which                remember.                                       and require participants to reflect
                                  support learning.                                                                                before responding.
Presentation                                                                       Uses different types of questions to            Gives clear, brief, and explicit
of Content                        Circulates about the room as                     obtain desired participants'                    directions and checks for
                                  participants engage in tasks and                 responses.                                      understanding.
                                  assists participants as needed.                  Recognizes participants' responses to           Reviews participants' work and
                                                                                   questions and provides feedback.                provides timely and specific written
                                                                                                                                   or verbal feedback.
                                  Selects or develops a variety of                 Uses test data and other assessments            Scores tests accurately and
                                  assessments and formats related to               to diagnose participant strengths and           objectively.
Evaluation                        specific learning objectives                     weaknesses.
of Student
and Program                       Creates a positive assessment                    Monitors participants during                    Instructs participants in
                                  atmosphere.                                      assessment.                                     assessment techniques.
                                  Speaks in a clear, audible, well                 Uses correct grammar in written and             Presents connected or associated
                                  modulated voice.                                 oral communications.                            ideas and thoughts.
Communication                     Expresses interest and excitement                Demonstrates basic mechanics of                 Communicates pertinent
                                  through verbal and nonverbal                     writing: spelling, capitalization, and          information and progress to
                                  behavior.                                        punctuation.                                    appropriate personnel.
                                  Ongoing documentation of strategies and direct services which focus clearly on improving student achievement as
                                  described in the Standards of Service policy. These may include classroom interventions; modeling alternative
Student Performance               teaching strategies; individualized training and technical assistance for teachers in order to increase their capacity to
                                  enhance the learning environment, improving family partnerships as described in the Standards of Student Services
                                  policy; screening, evaluation, and assessment; direct interventions with students and families; identification and
                                  planning for students with special needs; formulation of behavior management plans; development and
                                  implementation of monitoring and follow-up processes related to student achievement. The methods of
                                  documentation will be determined and agreed upon by the employee and the administrator.
                                  Creates and maintains an organized and                    Encourages participant to engage in and
                                                                                                                                                Promotes positive
                                  pleasant working environment.                             contribute to activities.
                                                                                                                                                self-concepts.
Management
Of Special Setting                                                                                                                              Uses appropriate
                                  Identifies individuals social, emotional                  Establishes an environment conducive to
                                                                                                                                                procedures to refer
                                  and/or physical needs that might affect                   positive peer interaction.
                                                                                                                                                individual
                                  success.
                                                                                                                                                participants for
                                                                                                                                                further assessment or
                                                                                                                                                intervention by other
                                                                                                                                                professionals.
                                  Establishes and implements specific                     Demonstrates an awareness of participant's
Behavior                          behavioral and                                          activities.
Management                        procedural expectations, rules and                        Stops inappropriate behavior before it              Reinforces positive
                                  consequences.                                             spreads or becomes more serious.                    behavior.

                                                                                                                                                Maintains a system
Records                           Maintains organized and up-to-date records.
                                                                                                                                                for recording
Management                                                                                                                                      individual
                                                                                                                                                participant's
                                                                                                                                                knowledge and
                                                                                                                                                progress.
                                                                                            Recognizes & promote the relationship of            Appropriately
Professional                      Presents accurate information.
                                                                                            the professional area to the total program.         organizes and
Knowledge                                                                                                                                       presents content for
                                                                                                                                                the specific
                                                                                                                                                professional area.

Professional                         Complies with Florida Statutes, State Board of Education Rules, School Board of Broward County Policies, and
Competencies                                                                  other applicable regulations.

Overall Performance Rating:                              S-Satisfactory              N-Needs Improvement
                                                                                     (Annual contract teachers
                                                                                     only)
                                                                                                                               U-Unsatisfactory
                                                                                                                                                                  
Comments by the assessor:



                                                                              Assessor                                                                                           Date
Comments by the employee:


                                                                              Employee                                                                                           Date
The employee's signature will indicate only that he/she has read this form and will not necessarily indicate agreement with its contents.
#4313                                                                                                                                                                                   W19994
2/98
                                                                                              G-13
 Broward County Public School District, Florida                                                                                      Performance Development Plan

Name of Employee                 SSAN                   School                       Assessor                        Date of this Plan             Follow-up / Review Date

 Last
 Name



              Identified Deficiencies                                    Strategies for Improvement, Corrections, and Assistance                    Expected Outcomes and
                                                                                                                                                           Timeline




Consequences for failure or refusal to remediate   Additional comments of the assessor:
all areas identified as deficient:

                                                                                                                                         Assesso                        Date
                                                   Comments of the employee:                                                             r


 Version 5,
 5/91
                                                                                                                                         Employe                         Date
                                                                                                                                         e
#4314         5/91                                                                                                                                                      W19995




                                                                                          G-14
                               APPENDIX IH

         BROWARD TEACHERS UNION/STEWARD DESIGNATION


The number of stewards is determined by the Broward Teachers Union using
the following formula: one (1) steward per thirty (30) bargaining members or
major fraction thereof, for example, seventy six (76) employees would merit
three (3) stewards.




                                    H-1
                                    APPENDIX JI


                 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN
                THE SCHOOL BOARD OF BROWARD COUNTY AND
                      THE BROWARD TEACHERS UNION

The School Board of Broward County shall implement a Broward Teacher Corp
Program in which the District provides funding support for programs to assist
teachers in becoming highly qualified educators.             The Broward Educational
Consortium partners with SBBC in this program to design and develop courses to
support H.R. 1 Section 1119, No Child Left Behind Act of 2001, Federal mandate and
to ensure that teachers are certified in the area that they teach.

1.    Teachers must meet the higher education institution entry requirements.

2.    Teachers must be full-time employees in Broward County Schools.

3.    Teachers shall be selected for participation based upon the following (listed in
      order of priority):

      a.    Teachers currently teaching out-of-field in an Upward Bound Title I
            school.

      b.    Teachers currently teaching out-of-field in a Title I school.

      c.    Teachers in an Upward Bound Title I school interested in pursuing
            certification in math, science, or reading.

      d.    Teachers in a Title I school interested in pursuing certification in math,
            science or reading.

4.    Program completion shall occur when the employee provides documentation
      that he/she has fulfilled all requirements and is eligible for certification and/or
      completed coursework requirements outlined by the higher education
      institution.

5.    After successful completion of the program, the employee shall be assigned to
      teach in the subject area in which the certification was received in a Title I
      school for a period equal to the period time in the Broward Teacher Corps. To
      be eligible for a guaranteed transfer provided in item 7, the employee must
      remain in the subject area in which certification was received unless
      involuntarily reassigned outside that subject area.




                                          I-1
Broward Teacher Corp Training Program
Page 2


6.    After completing the Broward Teacher Corps program and earning certification
      from the state, a teacher must commit to teaching in a Broward County Title I
      school for the same period of time that the Board paid his/her tuition in the
      Broward Teacher Corps. If he/she does not, he/she must pay back partial or
      full tuition costs paid by the district depending on how many years he/she is
      committed to teach in a District Title I school. (Example: If a teacher
      participates for three years and decides to leave a Title I school after one year,
      he/she must pay back 2/3 of the tuition costs to the district.) Tuition cost
      shall be based on a per credit hour basis.

7.    If the employee does not complete the training program, the employee shall
      reimburse the District for 100% of the training cost incurred. Teachers shall
      not be required to pay back tuition costs if the employee has a serious medical
      problem verified by a physician of the employee’s choice. The Board may
      require a subsequent exam by a Board selected physician at its expense. In
      addition, teachers shall not be required to pay back tuition costs if they are laid
      off, terminated, requested to resign, or involuntarily transferred on the basis of
      seniority.

8.    After successful completion of the program, employees who teach for three (3)
      years in a Title I school shall be guaranteed a transfer pursuant to provisions of
      Article 25 Section C (5) regardless of the years spent by the employee at the
      same work location. Such transfer must be requested within three (3) years of
      the end of the commitment period.

9.    An approved medical, professional leave nor personal leave will be accepted
      toward fulfillment of this obligation. Nor will such leaves be considered as a
      violation of the teacher’s obligation. The teacher shall be required to complete
      their commitment period or training upon return from such leaves.

10.   Employees who participate in this program shall be required to sign a
      Promissory Note agreeing to the reimbursement provision stated above.

11.   If the Board chooses to discontinue the Broward Teacher Corps program or pay
      less than the full cost of tuition, employees, who choose not to complete the
      program, shall not be required to fulfill any of the obligations contained herein
      nor shall the Board be required to fulfill any of the obligations contained herein
      for those employees.


10/3/02




                                          I-2
                            APPENDIX MJ
                   NO CHILD LEFT BEHIND ACT (NCLB)


A.   The parties agree that nothing in the school improvement section of the
     No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) shall be construed to alter or otherwise
     affect the rights, remedies, and procedures afforded school employees
     under the terms of this collective bargaining agreement.

B.   The District agrees that they will notify BTU of action that must be taken
     to comply with provisions of NCLB and to bargain those issues that are
     mandatory subjects of bargaining.

C.   Adequate Yearly Progress:        For schools identified as not making
     adequate yearly progress, the parties agree to form a committee to make
     recommendations to the Contract Administration Committee regarding
     the impact of legal requirements on issues, including but not limited to:

     1.    Any formal or informal understanding, condition or practice
           established between the parties.

     2.    Wages, hours, terms and other conditions of employment or
           matters established in statute such as but not limited to F.S.447
           Public Employees Collective Bargaining Act.

     3.    Employees who may be laid off in whole or in part or reduced in
           pay as a result of the implementation of a “public school choice”
           option provided by the NCLB.

     4.    Supplemental services such as but not limited to tutoring,
           mentoring, remediation, other educational intervention, etc., which
           can be provided by state certified bargaining unit members outside
           the regular employee workday and calendar.

     5.    The contracting out work that has been or could be performed by
           the members of the bargaining unit. Such work includes, but is
           not limited to tutoring and/or providing other supplemental
           services.

     6.    A restructuring, merger, takeover or other event that results in the
           creation of a new or successor employer, and the impact on the
           recognition of the Broward Teachers Union as the exclusive
           collective bargaining representative for the employees that it
           represents.




                                     J-1
                                APPENDIX K


                           AGREEMENT
           BETWEEN THE SCHOOL BOARD OF BROWARD COUNTY
                 AND THE BROWARD TEACHERS UNION


The parties agree to form a committee to investigate, design and develop a plan
that would provide a variety of options for an Employee Fringe Benefit Flexible
Spending Package.

Committee recommendations should be submitted to the Superintendent of
Schools and the Broward Teachers Union President no later than March 1,
2003.



10/10/02




                                     K-1
                                                                                               APPENDIX OK

                     RECONSTITUTION PROCESS
State declares an emergency, and/or Superintendent declares an emergency, pursuant to FS 1001.42 #19/SBBC Policy
 1403 and the following criteria: failure to make AYP, a designation of D or F for a second year or a designation of F
                                        for the second year in a four year period.


  Superintendent of Broward County Public Schools notifies state, SBBC, affected Area Superintendent, Associate
Superintendent of Human Resources and BTU in accordance with FS 1008.33, 1000.42 and SBBC Policy 1403 of the
                                             need to reconstitute.


Superintendent, Area Superintendent, Area Director, Principal on Task Assignment, Superintendent Schools, Associate
Superintendent of Human Resources, Directors of Instructional and Non-Instructional Staffing, School Administration,
 BTU President, BTU Field Services Director, BTU Field Representative, BTU Director of Communications, SBBC
Director of Communications, will meet with entire affected school staff to notify and explain reconstitution and orient
                                           staff to the related processes.



     Meeting will be conducted with the assigned Principal, Area Director, District and Union staff, BTU Field
 Representative, and the entire school staff for the purpose of communicating principal’s goals and expectations (may
                                    include easing-in activity conducted by HRD).


 Assigned Principal, Principal on Task Assignment for Superintendent Schools and Area Director will meet with each
    individual staff member for the purpose of conducting an interview and establishing staff member’s work site.



     Written notification (jointly authored by school administration and BTU) of the administrator’s intent to
                                  involuntarily transfer given to each staff member.



                            Identified staff members will transfer to another location.


           Staff member completes voluntary/involuntary Transfer Request Form and returns to his/her
                   administrator/designee within five business days of the written notification.



Administrator/Designee faxes forms to the appropriate staffing department within five business days of the written
                                                 notification.



 Staffing Departments coordinate placement as priority over surplussed employees in the same job classification.



                          HR provides official written notification of placement to staff.


                                                                           Identified staff members to
                                                                           remain at current location.
                           PLACEMENTS GO
                            TO THE BOARD
                            FOR APPROVAL
                                                                                      STOP
                                APPENDIX L


                MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
         BETWEEN THE SCHOOL BOARD OF BROWARD COUNTY
               AND THE BROWARD TEACHERS UNION


The above cited parties have concluded a series of meetings to establish a
career ladder program mandated by Florida Statute. Specifically, the provision
shall be in place until they are changed by mutual agreement between the
parties or the statutory mandate is repealed.

1.   The Broward Teachers Career Ladder (TCL) program shall be in effect
     upon approval by the Florida Department of Education for the 2003-
     2004 school year or for the 2004-2005 school year if approval of a pilot
     program for 2003-2004 is not granted.          The parties agree to the
     structure, provisions and levels of the TCL as stated herein. It is
     understood and agreed that such implementation shall be contingent
     upon the State providing full funding for said implementation as well as
     for a continuation of this plan in the future.

2.   These provisions are intended to comply with the statutory requirements
     of the BEST Career Ladder program. Any provision that is not in
     compliance with the statutes or regulations governing this program shall
     be invalid, and the parties agree to reopen negotiations to modify this
     agreement to bring it into compliance.

3.   The Broward TCL shall consist of four sequential career advancement
     levels for classroom teachers: Associate, Professional, Lead and Mentor.
     Classroom teachers shall be placed on an appropriate level according to
     the following criteria:

     Associate Teacher
      Must have applied for or hold a temporary certificate; or
      Any teacher whose most recent evaluation rating is unsatisfactory.

     Professional Teacher
      Must possess or be eligible for appropriate State of Florida or Broward
        professional certification

     Lead Teacher
      Must possess or be eligible for appropriate State of Florida or Broward
        professional certification
      Must have been a “Professional Teacher” for at least one year



                                     L-1
      Must have a current satisfactory evaluation
      Must demonstrate outstanding performance (defined as NBC or BCRP)

     Mentor Teacher
      Must possess or be eligible for appropriate State of Florida or Broward
       professional certification
      Must have been a Lead Teacher for at least two years
      Must have had a satisfactory evaluation for the previous three years
      Must demonstrate outstanding performance (defined as NBC or BCRP)

4.   Initial Placement: Teachers employed in Broward County at the time of
     the initial implementation of the TCL shall be placed on the appropriate
     level without regard to the number of years required as a “Professional
     Teacher” or “Lead Teacher”. Teachers who transfer from outside of the
     district may use past experience and documentation from his/her
     referenced school district to meet the requirements for a TCL position.

5.   The initial orientation to the program will clearly communicate the
     qualifications, roles and responsibilities of each level. Teachers will be
     automatically placed on the Associate and Professional teacher levels.
     Teachers who qualify for Lead and Mentor levels must apply for the
     position. Teachers who apply for these leadership positions will need to
     provide evidence such as NBC/BCRP certification and performance on
     the IPAS. There will be an appeal process for teachers that feel that they
     are misplaced within the Career Ladder.

6.   Vacant Lead and Mentor teacher positions in schools will be posted along
     with other teacher vacancies. During the first year of implementation of
     the program, each school shall be eligible to have at least one Lead and
     one Mentor teacher and be eligible to have Lead and Mentor teacher
     positions for all qualified applicants. Thereafter, each school shall have
     no more than one (1) Lead teacher for every seven (7)
     Associate/Professional teachers (1:7) and one (1) Mentor teacher for
     every three (3) Lead teachers (1:3). Teachers who are identified as Lead
     or Mentors during the 2003-2004 school year shall be allowed to remain
     in those position in subsequent school years. Thereafter, the aforestated
     caps shall apply. School principals will interview and select applicants
     from among those who meet the qualifications for the position.

7.   The district shall develop job descriptions that provide for extended
     workdays for Lead and Mentor teachers. Lead teachers shall work an
     additional half (.5) hour per day, and Mentor teachers shall work an
     additional one (1) hour per day. Time beyond the normal workday shall
     be used for Lead teacher: duties associated with holding required two or
     more leadership positions at the school site, serving as a faculty for



                                     L-2
     professional development activities, and participating in direct
     instruction of students. Mentor teacher: serving as a regular mentor,
     attend Peer Review training, serving as faculty-based professional
     development coordinator, sharing expertise with other teachers, and
     participating on a regular basis in the direct instruction of low
     performing students. Teachers may use their preparation/conference
     time to perform the activities of Lead and Mentor teachers.

8.   Compensation: The parties agree to the attached salary schedules for
     each level of the Career Ladder. Salary schedules for 2003-2004 and
     future years shall apply to Associate and Professional teachers.
     Associate teachers shall be placed on the appropriate salary schedule
     based on verified experience. Once an individual who moved to the
     Associate level due to an unsatisfactory evaluation advances to the
     Professional Teacher level, reimbursement for steps missed on the
     Professional level will be provided. The salary schedule for Professional
     teachers shall be developed for 2003-2004 and future years based on an
     increase of $200 per year at each step of the Associate schedule. Salary
     schedules for Lead teachers shall be developed for 2003-2004 and future
     years based on an increase of $12,500 per year at each step of the
     Associate schedule. Salary schedules for Mentor teachers shall be
     developed for those years based on an increase of $20,000 per year at
     each step of the Associate schedule. Lead and Mentor teachers will be
     placed on the appropriate salary schedule based on verified experience,
     and the remuneration provided in those two salary schedules is inclusive
     of leadership supplements, wages for additional time/responsibilities,
     and district incentive for NBC and BCRP. Salaries for Professional, Lead
     and Mentor teachers shall be paid retroactively to the 99th day of the
     employee’s work year.

9.   Funding: It is understood and agreed that the term “Full Funding” shall
     mean that the State provides at least $250/FTE student in the district as
     money categorically earmarked for the career ladder program over and
     above all other funding for school operations. Therefore, it is agreed that
     if the State fails to provide “Full Funding”, the program shall not be
     implemented as specific herein. Plans shall be modified, abandoned or
     held in abeyance until such time as the parties agree that the State is
     meeting its obligation to fully fund the mandated program.

     The parties agree that TCL funding may be adjusted according to the
     level of annual funding provided by the State of Florida for both the pilot
     program as well as in future years. Should the State of Florida fail to
     provide full funding to support the TCL at its anticipated level, the
     parties may adjust compensation on both the Lead and Mentor salary
     schedules and/or reduce the number of Lead and Mentor teachers.



                                     L-3
      Should the number of positions be reduced or eliminated, the district
      shall follow the procedures in the Collective Bargaining Agreement for
      involuntary transfers.

10.   An Associate or Professional teacher who demonstrates outstanding
      performance based on NBC or BCRP shall receive the applicable
      supplements in accordance with contract provisions. Lead and Mentor
      teachers shall have the supplements for NBC or BCRP incorporated into
      their applicable salary schedule.

11.   Lead teachers and Mentor teachers shall be offered professional
      development that directly relates to the duties and responsibilities that
      they are expected to perform according to their job descriptions.




                                     L-4
                                                                  APPENDIX L


                      MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT


The parties mutually agree that upon approval of and in alignment with a
School Board Policy on Domestic Violence Leave, the three (3) days of leave as
outlined by Florida Statute shall be paid leave for employees who are victims of
domestic violence as defined in Florida Statute 741.28.




                                      L-1
                                                                        APPENDIX M

       SECLUSION AND RESTRAINT OF CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES


1.   Prohibited Actions
     School personnel are not allowed to use mechanical restraint or manual
     physical restraint that restricts a student’s breathing. School personnel are not
     allowed to close, lock or physically block a student in a room that is unlit and
     does not meet the requirements for seclusion time-out rooms provided in State
     Fire Marshal rule 69A-58.0084, F.A.C. Teachers will refrain from all prohibited
     actions contained in State Board Rules and Florida Administrative Code.

2.   Documentation and Incident Reporting
     Documentation of incidents in which manual physical restraint or seclusion is
     used with a student with a disability must occur and a timely report made to
     the parent or guardian.

3.   Teacher Responsibility
     Classroom teachers are responsible for providing incident information to the
     designee responsible for reporting whenever the use of seclusion and restraint
     occurs that must be documented and reported under Florida Statute. There
     shall be no additional paperwork requirements associated with such reports
     other than those already required for incident reporting without the
     presentation of such procedures to the Paperwork Reduction Committee.

4.   District Responsibility
     The District is responsible to inform teachers of students with disabilities of:
     a.     The requirements to law regarding the seclusion and restraint of student
            with disabilities.
     b.     The prohibited methods of restraining or secluding a student with
            disabilities.
     c.     The types of restraint and seclusion that may be appropriate to use.
     d.     The requirements for documentation that must be included in an
            incident report involving restraint or seclusion of a student with a
            disability.
     e.     The District procedures for parent notification, incident reporting, data
            collection and monitoring of the use of restraint or seclusion of students
            with a disability.

5.   Except for engaging in prohibited actions, teachers shall not be held responsible
     for violations of the laws and regulations pertaining to the seclusion and
     restraint of students with disabilities until the District has formulated
     appropriate policies and provided necessary information to teachers regarding
     those policies and regulations. Teachers shall receive the appropriate training
     prior to being designated as special resources (Professional Crisis Management
     Team) for the physical restraint of students.




                                        M-1
                                                                  APPENDIX N



      MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE SCHOOL BOARD OF
     BROWARD COUNTY, FLORIDA AND THE BROWARD TEACHERS UNION

                BACK TO SCHOOL NIGHT (PILOT PROGRAM)


The School Board of Broward County (SBBC) and the Broward Teachers Union
(BTU) mutually agree to the following terms regarding a Pilot Program for a
second Back-to-School Night event:

1.     For the 2007-2008 school year only, high schools on a 4x4 block
       schedule may plan a second back-to-school night.

2.     Employees who volunteer to attend shall be compensated for three (3)
       hours at their hourly rate.

3.     The issue of block scheduling shall be referred to the High School Reform
       Committee for study and recommendations to the Contract
       Administration Committee (CAC).

The continuation of this pilot program beyond the 2007-2008 school year is
contingent upon mutual agreement by both parties.




                                      N-1
                                                                    APPENDIX P


                 RETIREMENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (RAP)


For the 2008-2009 school year only, the parties agree to offer this Retirement
Assistance Program (RAP). This program will sunset on June 30, 2009. The
parties may extend this program by mutual agreement only.

The parties agree to offer this Retirement Assistance Program (RAP) to employees
who meet the following eligibility requirements.

A.    Eligibility Requirements:

      1.    Full-time bargaining unit members who are at least age 55 and on
            Step 20 or higher on the teachers’ salary schedule in the FRS and
            who have at least ten (10) years of service in the District.

            OR

            Full-time bargaining unit members who are at least age 55 and on
            Step 20 or above in the TRS and who have at least ten (10) years of
            service in the District.

      2.    The employee must sign an irrevocable retirement form by October
            15, 2008.

      3.    The employee must retire at the conclusion of the 2008-2009 school
            year.

      4.    RAP is not available to re-employed Broward School Board retirees or
            employees in DROP.

      5.    An employee participating in this program will not be rehired by the
            District in a permanent position until the individual’s RAP program is
            completed.

B.    Description of Benefits:

      1.    Enhanced Health Insurance Benefits:

            a.     Effective upon retirement, the Board will provide paid employee
                   health insurance until the employee is Medicare eligible.

            b.     The Board will only pay for a Board offered HMO or Consumer
                   Driven Plan premium.          Employees selecting other Board
                   sponsored health plans will pay the additional cost above the
                   most expensive HMO or Consumer Driven plans. Said excess
                   cost shall be directly paid to the School Board.


                                    APX. P-1
                                                                    APPENDIX P



           c.     This health insurance benefit is in addition to the State health
                  insurance subsidy for which eligible retirees are required to
                  apply directly to the State’s Division of Retirement.

           d.     Payment will be made to the Board approved carriers on the
                  retiree’s behalf, until the employee becomes Medicare eligible.

           e.     Should the retiree elect not to continue with one of the Board’s
                  health plans, he/she will not be eligible to re-enroll in
                  subsequent years nor will they be eligible for payment of
                  insurance benefits.

     2.    Term Life Insurance:

           The Board shall provide group term life insurance of $50,000. This
           benefit will be in effect for the same time period as the health
           insurance benefit described in B, 1 above.

     3.    Salary Adjustment:

           The Board shall increase the salary by $10,000 of each employee who
           participates in the program and retirees at the end of the 2008-2009
           school year. Said salary increase shall be included in the employee’s
           salary as equal amount payments and retroactive to the start of the
           2008-2009 school year. Payments shall commence with the next
           feasible payroll cycle following October 15, 2008. Payments shall be
           subject to FICA and withholding taxes.

C.   Communication:

     The parties agree to develop a comprehensive communication program for
     the potential participants.

D.   Participation:

     The RAP program will be implemented only in the event that 150 employees
     enroll. Should target numbers not be met or exceeded, the providing parties
     will convene to resolve any outstanding implementation issues. In the event
     that RAP is not implemented, any submitted irrevocable retirement form
     mentioned in Section A, 2 shall be null and void. Additionally, the parties
     agree to meet and arrive at a final decision regarding the issues related to
     the non-implementation.




                                   APX. P-2
                                               BTU INDEX
                                               Page 1 of 16

Subject                                                                                   Article/Section

Absences, Employee .......................................................................... 19 P
Abuse, Reporting Incidents ............................................................... 11 K
Academic Freedom ............................................................................... 13
    Democratic Tradition .................................................................. 13 A
    Individual Rights .........................................................................13 B
    Rights of Others ..........................................................................13 C
Access to Buildings .............................................................................5 N
Access Rights (Union) ........................................................................ 29 A
Accountability ...................................................................................... 15
    Committee Involvement ...............................................................15 B
    Reconciliation/Intervention Team............................................... 15 D
    Shared Governance ..................................................................... 15 E
    Training ......................................................................................15 C
    Voting Procedures ................................................................ 15 G 3-5
Accountability Program Funding ........................................................ 15 I
Accrual of Sick Leave ..................................................................... 12 A 1
Accrued Annual Leave ...................................................................... 23 Q
Achievement Incentive Pay ................................................................... 21
Active Military Service Status ............................................................. 23 I
Adjustment of Grievance .................................................................. 34 G
Admission to Events.......................................................................... 19 L
Advanced Degree Stipend Committee ............................................... 30 G
Advanced Degree Stipends, Procedures for In-Field Incentives Appendix A
Advanced Incentive Award ............................................ 21 B, Appendix E
After and Before School Care ................................................................ 19
Aggregate Method of Computing Taxes .............................................. 19 S
Air Quality & Health/Safety Sub-Committee ....................................... 7 F
Alternative Teaching Assignments .................................................... 10 G
Americans with Disabilities Act ......................................................... 23 T
Annual Contract Employees, Re-employment of ................................18 C
    Involuntary Transfer ................................................................ 18 C 3
    Recommendation for PSC ........................................................... 18 D
    Surplussing, Placement........................................................... 18 D 3
    Personnel Files ............................................................................ 18 E
Annual Leave, Accrued ..................................................................... 23 Q
Annuity Programs ............................................................................. 22 E
Anonymous Items in Personnel File ................................................ 18 E 3
Appeal of Grievance .......................................................................... 34 J
Applicants, Preference of .................................................................. 20 G
Application Form .............................................................................. 20 E
Application for Professional Improvement Leave ................................ 23 J
                                                BTU INDEX
                                                Page 2 of 16

Subject                                                                                     Article/Section

Arbitration, Cost of ........................................................................... 34 E
Arbitration, Expedited ...................................................................... 34 M
Assessment Criteria (IPAS)/Form .................... 18 F 2 i and j, Appendix G
Assignments, School ........................................................................ 19 U
Assignments, Student Teaching ........................................................... 16
Athletic Events, Admission to ............................................................ 19 L
Automobile Vandalism .................................................................. 22 H 2

Back to School Night/Open House ...................................................... 6 L
Bank, Sick Leave............................................................................... 23 R
Basic Incentive Award ................................................... 21 A, Appendix E
Bargaining Agent ...................................................................... 3 G, 29 R
Bargaining Unit Roster ...................................................................... 29 T
Before and After School Care ................................................................ 19
Behavioral Objectives ..........................................................................5 R
Behavior, Procedures to correct ........................................................ 11 M
Bereavement Leave ........................................................................ 23 A 3
Blank Forms, Signing of ............................................................... 18 F 2 i
Block Schedule .................................................................................10 C
Block Schedule Voting ............................................................... 15 G 3-5
Board Agenda .................................................................................. 29 G
Board Determination........................................................................ 23 O
Bomb Threats .................................................................................... 7 D
Broward Teacher Corp Training Program ................................. Appendix I
BTU .................................................................................................. 3 H
Budget for Faculty Council ................................................................17 B
Building Access...................................................................................5 N
Bulletin Boards, Union Access ..........................................................29 C
Bullying/Harassment ..........................................................................6 K
Bus Duty ........................................................................................... 5 A
Buy Back Program, Sick Leave ......................................................... 21 D

CAB E-Mail usage .............................................................................29 C
Cafeteria Insurance Program ............................................................. 22 J
Calendar, School .................................................................................. 27
Career Incentives ................................................................... Appendix E
Cash-In Sick Leave ......................................................................... 21 D
Cell Phone Reimbursement ............................................................... 19 T
Chairperson/Team Leader, Duties .................................................. 9 A 4
Challenge to Voting Procedure....................................................... 11 G 5
Change of Teaching Stations ............................................................. 10 E
                                              BTU INDEX
                                              Page 3 of 16

Subject                                                                                 Article/Section

Changing Grades ............................................................................... 8 G
Child Protective Services .................................................................. 11 Q
Classroom Discipline......................................................................... 11 E
Classroom Teacher serving as District Representative .......................12 C
Classroom Visitation .......................................................................... 5 O
Clerical Support ................................................................................. 6 M
Commencement of Negotiations ........................................................36 B
Commitment, Parties ........................................................................ 30 A
Complaints on Employees ............................................................. 18 B 2
Complaints-Discrimination .............................................................. 23 T
Composition of Faculty Council .........................................................17 C
Computer Equipment ..........................................................................8 C
Computer Software (Educational) ........................................................8 B
Computer Tapes............................................................................... 29 Q
Conditions of Employment ..................................................................... 5
Conduct Business ............................................................................ 29 D
Conference Areas ................................................................................. 5 I
Conference, Annual Assessment .............................................. 18 F 2 h 3
Conference Post-Observation ................................................... 18 F 2 h 1
Conferences ................................................................................... 18 B 5
    Written Notification .................................................................. 18 A 1
    Notice to Employee ................................................................... 18 A 2
    Right To Union Representation .................................................... 18 A
Conference Time, Preparation of ........................................................ 10 A
Contents of Openings/Notices ...........................................................20 C
Continuing Insurance Coverage While on Leave ................................ 23 L
Continuity of Classroom Instruction ................................................. 21 D
Contract Administration Committee ................................................. 30 H
Contract Enforcement ....................................................................... 29 S
Contract, Individual ......................................................................... 30 D
Contract Provisions, Legality ............................................................30 B
Contractual Pay (No Summer Paychecks) ....................................... 19 N 2
Convention, State..............................................................................29 N
Copying Agreement, Cost of............................................................... 30 E
Copying of Personnel File ............................................................... 18 E 6
Copying/Typing Equipment ................................................................8 C
Correct Behavior, Procedure to ......................................................... 11 M
Cost of Arbitration ............................................................................ 34 E
Cost of Copying Agreement................................................................ 30 E
Coverage, Insurance.......................................................................... 22 A
Covering Classes ................................................................................ 6 D
                                                 BTU INDEX
                                                 Page 4 of 16

Subject                                                                                     Article/Section

Credit for, Special Program Experience ............................................. 19 H
Credit for Teaching Experience .......................................................... 19 E
Critical Shortage Area .......................................................................21 C
Critical Shortage, Sabbatical Applicants .......................................23 D 10
Curriculum and Instruction ................................................................... 8
Curriculum Councils.............................................................................. 9

Data Collection Review Committee ....................................................... 12
Death/Threat/Violent Nature, Reports of ....................................... 11 K 2
Declared Emergency Leave ............................................................... 23 W
Deduction for Absences ..................................................................... 19 P
Deductions, Other .............................................................................. 29 I
Definition of Grievance ...................................................................... 34 A
Definitions ............................................................................................. 3
Department Chairpersons, Curriculum Councils and Professional
Development Council ............................................................................. 9
    Appeal Meeting .......................................................................... 9 A 3
    Chairperson/Team Leader duties ............................................... 9 A 4
    Filling of Vacancies .................................................................... 9 A 2
    Release Time .................................................................................9 B
    Selection Process ....................................................................... 9 A 1
Differentiated Accountability (DA)..................................................... 31 D
Direct Deposit .................................................................................. 19 O
Disability Insurance ..........................................................................22 C
Discipline, Probationary Period ................................................... 18 B 1 b
Discrimination .................................................................................. 29 F
Discrimination Complaints................................................................ 23 T
Discipline, Student ............................................................................. 11
    Assistance and Support To Employees ........................................11 C
         School Board Responsibility
    Classroom Discipline................................................................... 11 E
    District Discipline Committee ......................................................11 B
    School Board Responsibility ....................................................... 11 D
    Student Discipline Plan ............................................................... 11 F
         Faculty Vote ....................................................................... 11 F 3
    Special Assistance....................................................................... 11 J
    Written Statement ...................................................................... 11 H
Discipline, Progressive (Employee) ............................................... 18 B 1 a
Dismissal, Recommendation for ..................................................... 18 B 4
District Discipline Committee ............................................................11 B
District Standard Referral Form ....................................................... 11 G
                                                 BTU INDEX
                                                 Page 5 of 16

Subject                                                                                     Article/Section

Direct Deposit .................................................................................. 19 O
Documents, Refusal to Sign ........................................................... 18 B 6
Domestic Violence Leave (MOA) ...............................................Appendix L
Donation of Sick Leave to a Family Member ...................................... 23 V
Drug Free Workplace ........................................................................ 24 F
Due Process/Personnel Files/Employee Evaluation .............................. 18
    Notification To Employee .......................................................... 18 E 5
    Union Representation ................................................................. 18 A
    Written Notification of Reasons for Conference ......................... 18 A 1
Dues Deduction .............................................................................. 29 H
Duty-Free Lunch ................................................................................ 5 D

Early Release Day, Professional Develop. Customized Activities ........ 5 L 6
Early Release Time .............................................................................. 5 V
Early Release Time for Stewards ....................................................... 29 D
Elected to Public Office .....................................................................23 N
Election Day, Notice of .................................................................. 15 G 4
Electronic Grade Books ...................................................................... 6 O
Elementary Preparation/Conference Time ......................................... 10 A
E-Mail usage .....................................................................................29 C
Emergency School Closing ................................................................... 28
Employee Absences ........................................................................... 19 P
Employee Assistance Program .............................................................. 24
Employee Discipline, Progressive ................................................. 18 A 1 a
Employee Facilities ............................................................................. 5 F
Employee Input, Administrator’s Annual Assessment ..........................5 X
Employee Preparation, Conference and Planning .................................. 10
Employee Reimbursement ....................................................... 11 N, 22 H
Employee Rights ...............................................................................18 B
Endorsement after election............................................................ 15 G 6
Equal Opportunity .............................................................................. 6 J
Equipment ................................................................................ 5 Q, 29 B
Equipment, Computer & Typing ..........................................................8 C
Equipment, Safety...............................................................................7 B
Errors In Paychecks ......................................................................... 19 Q
ESOL ................................................................................................... 33
Establishment of Faculty Council ...................................................... 17 A
Evaluation ........................................................................................ 18 F
Evaluation Form ................................................................... Appendix G
Events, Admission to......................................................................... 19 L
Examinations, Physical ....................................................................... 6 A
                                               BTU INDEX
                                               Page 6 of 16

Subject                                                                                   Article/Section

Examining Students............................................................................7 E
Exclude a student from class ......................................................... 11 F 2
Exclusions of Contract ........................................................................... 2
Exclusive Rights to process grievance ................................................34 B
Exempt from Surplusing ............................................................... 25 D 5
Expedited Arbitration ....................................................................... 34 M
Experience for Credit, Other ............................................................. 19 H
Experience, Special Program ............................................................ 19 H
Extra Pay ...................................................................................... 19 G 2

Facilities, School .................................................................................7 C
Faculty Council .................................................................................... 17
Faculty Meetings .................................................................................5 K
Faculty Meetings, Report of Steward ................................................. 29 K
Family and Medical Leave ................................................................. 23 S
Field Trips........................................................................................ 11 O
Flexibility, Professional Development ................................................ 5 L 3
Florida Law ....................................................................................... 29 X
File, Student Discipline ...................................................................... 11 I
Filing Charges-Assistance ................................................................. 11 L
Formal Grievance ............................................................................. 34 D
Formal Observation..................................................................... 18 F 2 g
Four Day Work Week ..........................................................................5 E
Full-Time Employees ...........................................................................6 E
Funding, Accountability Program ....................................................... 15 I

General Employment Practices ............................................................... 6
Grade Books, Electronic ..................................................................... 6 O
Grade Level Chairpersons, Department Chairperson, and Team Leaders
    Filling a Vacancy During the School Year ................................... 9 A 2
    Release Time .................................................................................9 B
    Selection Process ....................................................................... 9 A 1
Grades (Curriculum and Instruction) .................................................... 8
    Changing Grades ......................................................................... 8 G
    Submission of Grades ...................................................................8 E
Grievance Procedure ............................................................................ 34
Grievance Form...................................................................... Appendix B
Group Insurance Program .................................................................. 22 I
Guaranteed Transfers .................................................................... 25 C 5
Guild Teachers Supplement ................................................... Appendix F
                                                 BTU INDEX
                                                 Page 7 of 16

Subject                                                                                     Article/Section

Harassment of Steward(s)..................................................................... 29
Harassment/Bullying of Teacher(s) .....................................................6 K
Hardship Transfers ........................................................................ 25 C 3
Hazardous/Unsafe Conditions ............................................................ 7 A
Health and Safety .................................................................................. 7
Health/Safety and Air Quality Committee ........................................... 7 F
Health/Safety Component .................................................................. 7 G
Holidays/Taking Personal Time ...................................................... 23 A 2
Hourly Rate/Salary .......................................................................... 19 G

I.D./Parking Passes ......................................................................... 29 U
Illness-In-Line-of-Duty ......................................................................23 B
Immediately Hazardous, Dangerous, or Infectious Conditions .......... 7 A 2
Incentive Awards (Achievement Incentive Pay) ................. 21, Appendix E
     Advanced Incentive Award ...................................... 21 B, Appendix E
     Basic Incentive Award ............................................. 21 A, Appendix E
Inclusion.............................................................................................. 35
Inclusion to Contract ............................................................................. 2
Inclusion Volunteer Teachers ............................................................35 C
Indemnity Insurance ......................................................................... 22 F
Individual Contract .......................................................................... 30 D
Informal Discussion of Grievance ......................................................34 C
Information and Reports ................................................................... 29 E
Inservice, Voluntary/Stipend Rate..................................................... 19 R
Instructional Personnel Assessment System (IPAS) ........ 18 F, Appendix G
Insults ................................................................................................6 K
Insurance ............................................................................................ 22
Insurance Advisory Committee, Superintendent .......................... 22 B 1 a
Insurance, Continuing Coverage while on leave ................................. 23 L
Insurance, New Employees ............................................................. 22 B 2
Insurance, Opt-Out ........................................................................ 22 B 4
Internet Access ...................................................................................8 C
Interruptions to Teaching ................................................................... 5 O
Investigation of Employees ............................................................. 18 B 3
Investigative File ............................................................................ 18 E 4
Involuntary Assignments.................................................................... 4 D
Involuntary Transfers/Surplus......................................................... 25 D

Job Descriptions .................................................................................. 6 I
Jury Duty ......................................................................................... 23 F
Just Cause ................................................................................. 18 B 1 a
                                                 BTU INDEX
                                                 Page 8 of 16

Subject                                                                                     Article/Section


Labor/Management Meeting ......................................................7 H, 29 L
Labor/Management Meetings, Reimbursement for Mileage,
    Tolls and Parking ......................................................................... 19 I
Layoff/Recall................................................................................. 26 A,B
Leave of Absence for Professional Improvement ................................. 23 J
Leave, Continuing Insurance while on ............................................... 23 L
Leave, Returning early from ............................................................. 23 M
Leaves.................................................................................................. 23
Leave, Sabbatical ..............................................................................21 C
Leave, Teaching Position while on ..................................................... 23 L
Legal Commitments .......................................................................... 23 F
Legality, Contract Provisions .............................................................30 B
Length of Leave ................................................................................ 23 M
Length of Office for Faculty Council.................................................. 17 D
Length of Workday ..............................................................................5 E
Lesson Plans ....................................................................................... 5 S
Liability Insurance ........................................................................... 22 D
Low Performing Schools Incentive ..................................................... 19 A

Maintenance of Sick Leave Bank .................................................... 23 R 5
Management Rights & Responsibilities of the School District ................ 31
Materials.............................................................................................8 B
Materials/Storage ...............................................................................5 B
Maternity Leave ................................................................................ 23 K
Media Center ..................................................................................... 8 D
Medical Procedures .............................................................................. 7 I
Meetings for Faculty Council ............................................................. 17 E
Membership Pins ............................................................................. 29 M
Mileage/Parking/Tolls Reimbursement .............................................. 19 I
Military Reserve Leave ...................................................................... 23 H
Military Service .................................................................................19 B
Military Service Status, Active ............................................................ 23 I
Miscellaneous ...................................................................................... 30
Modify Contract Language through MOU.............................................. 3 I
Musical Performances ....................................................................... 19 K

National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS) ............ 15 J
Negotiations, Commencement of .......................................................36 B
New Schools, Filling Vacancies .......................................................... 25 F
New Student to District .....................................................................35 B
                                                BTU INDEX
                                                Page 9 of 16

Subject                                                                                     Article/Section

New Teacher Orientation Program ...................................................... 5 W
No Child Left Behind Act .........................................................Appendix J
No Strike.............................................................................................. 32
Notice of Election Day ................................................................... 15 G 4
Notice of Openings ............................................................................20 B
Notices, Content of ............................................................................20 C
Notification, Substitute .......................................................................6 B
Notification to Employees of Personnel File ..................................... 18 E 5
Number of Personnel Files.............................................................. 18 E 1
Number of Student Teachers .............................................................16 B

Off-Street Parking .............................................................................. 5 H
Official Grievance Form .......................................................... Appendix B
Open House ........................................................................................ 6 L
Optimal Time Usage ......................................................................... 10 D
Opt-Out of Insurance ..................................................................... 22 B 4
Orientation, New Teacher ................................................................... 5 W
Other Experience Credit ................................................................... 19 H
Overpayments in Paycheck .........................................................19 Q 2,3

Paid Leave Days ................................................................................ 29 P
Paperwork Reduction ........................................................................... 12
    Establishment............................................................................. 12 A
    Composition................................................................................12 C
    Faculty Council/Paperwork........................................................ 12 G
    Form Control Report ................................................................... 12 F
    Purpose ......................................................................................12 B
    Recommendations of Data Collection Review Committee ............ 12 H
    Responsibilities .......................................................................... 12 D
    Term ...........................................................................................12 C
    Written Recommendations .......................................................... 12 E
Parking Reimbursement ..................................................................... 19 I
Parking/I.D. Passes ......................................................................... 29 U
Parking, Off-street .............................................................................. 5 H
Participation, Voluntary ................................................................... 19 M
Parties Commitment ......................................................................... 30 A
Pay for Performance .................................................................... 18 F 2 q
Paycheck, Errors in .......................................................................... 19 Q
Payments, Salary ..............................................................................19 N
Payroll Dues Deduction/Other Deductions ....................................... 29 H
Performance Based Pay ............................................................... 18 F 2 q
                                                BTU INDEX
                                               Page 10 of 16

Subject                                                                                     Article/Section

Performance Development Plans ................................................ 18 F 2 m
Personal Property Reimbursement................................................. 22 H 1
Personal Reasons Leave ........................................................ 23 A 2, 23 K
Personal Time Taken near holiday .................................................. 23 A 2
Personnel, Reduction in ....................................................................... 26
Personnel File - Access and Security ................................................. 18 E
Personal or Maternity Leave .............................................................. 23 K
Physical Examinations ........................................................................ 6 A
Placement Review Committee ............................................................ 11 P
Planning Days-Meetings ...................................................................... 5 L
Planning Days, Use of ........................................................................ 5 M
Planning Time/Preparation of Conference Time ................................. 10 A
Policy Rules ......................................................................................30 C
Political Activity ................................................................................... 14
     Political Action ............................................................................ 14 A
     Political Coercion ........................................................................14 C
     Political Materials........................................................................14 B
Pool Days .......................................................................................... 29 P
Posting of Notices ..............................................................................29 C
Posting of Positions ........................................................................... 20 A
Positing of Vacancies...................................................................... 25 B 5
Position Assistance ....................................................................... 25 D 4
Potentially Unsafe/Unhealthy Conditions ......................................... 7 A 1
Preamble................................................................................................ 1
Preference of Applicants ................................................................... 20 G
Premium Amount, Insurance ............................................................22 B
Primary Responsibility of Teachers ...................................................... 5 A
Printing Costs ................................................................................... 30 E
Probationary Period..................................................................... 18 B 1 b
Procedures to Correct Misbehavior ................................................... 11 M
Procedures to Fill Vacancies at New Schools...................................... 25 F
Professional Compensation .................................................................. 19
Professional Development Network (PDN) ............................................9 C
     Reports ......................................................................................9 C 2
     Sub-Committee, Curriculum Councils ........................................9 C 3
Professional Educator Development ............................................. 18 F 2 l
Professional Development Activities .................................................. 5 L 4
Professional Development, Customized Activities on Early Release/Planning Days 5 L 6
Professional Development Flexibility ................................................. 5 L 3
Professional Development, School Improvement Plan (SIP) ............... 5 L 7
Professional Development Team ....................................................... 5 L 5
                                                BTU INDEX
                                               Page 11 of 16

Subject                                                                                     Article/Section

Professional Improvement Leave ........................................................ 23 J
Professional Leave to Attend Summer School ................................... 23 G
Professional Services Contract, Recommendation for ........................ 18 D
Professional Sabbatical Leave ........................................................... 23 U
Professional Qualifications and Assignments .......................................... 4
Profit-Sharing Funds, Insurance .................................................... 22 B 3
Progressive Discipline ................................................................. 18 B 1 a
Promotional and Supplementary Pay Openings .................................... 20
Psychologists Information ................................................................... 8 F
Public Office, Elected to ....................................................................23 N
Purpose of Faculty Council................................................................17 B

Qualifications.................................................................................... 20 F
Qualifications for Supplementary Pay Positions .............................. 19 F 2
Qualifications to be a Supervising Teacher ........................................ 16 A
Qualified Employees......................................................................... 20 D

Race to the Top (RTTT) ..................................................................... 31 D
Rate Increase ................................................................................... 22 G
Reassignments & Transfers .................................................................. 25
Recall/Layoff................................................................................. 26 A,B
Recess, Elementary Schools ................................................................ 5 A
Recognition ............................................................................................ 2
Recommendation for Dismissal ...................................................... 18 B 4
Recommendation for Professional Services Contract ......................... 18 D
Reconciliation/Intervention Team..................................................... 15 D
Reconstitution Process ........................................................... Appendix K
Reduction by Seniority .................................................................. 25 D 2
Reduction in Paperwork ....................................................................... 12
Reduction in Personnel ........................................................................ 26
Reemployment of First and Second Year Annual Contract Employees 18 C
Reference Materials ............................................................................. 8 A
Referral Form, District Standard ...................................................... 11 G
Refuse to sign documents .............................................................. 18 B 6
Registration ....................................................................................... 5 U
Reimbursement to Employees ................................................. 11 N, 22 H
Release Time for Department Chairpersons, Curriculum
 Councils, and Professional Development Council..............................9 B
Release Time for Stewards, Early Release Days ................................ 29 D
Release Time for Union Meetings ....................................................... 29 Y
Relief Period ........................................................................................ 5 J
                                               BTU INDEX
                                              Page 12 of 16

Subject                                                                                   Article/Section

Removal of Student ........................................................................... 11 P
Replacement Teacher ........................................................................ 23 P
Representation, Union ...................................................................... 18 A
Reprisal to Employees ...................................................................... 34 H
Reporting Incidents ........................................................................... 11 K
    Filing Charges ............................................................................. 11 L
Reports and Information ................................................................... 29 E
Reports at Faculty Meetings .............................................................. 29 K
Request for Transfer (Form) .................................................... Appendix C
Restrictions for use of equipment ........................................................8 C
Retirement Qualification ...................................................................26 C
Returning Early From Leave ............................................................. 23 M
Review of Personnel File ................................................................. 18 E 6
Rights, Employee ..............................................................................18 B
Rights, Union ....................................................................................... 29
Roster of Bargaining Unit .................................................................. 29 T

Sabbatical Committee ..................................................................23 D 12
Sabbatical Leave ............................................................ 21 C, 23 D, 23 U
Safety Equipment................................................................................7 B
Safety/Health/Air Quality Committee ................................................. 7 F
Salary Adjustments .......................................................................... 19 D
Salary/Hourly Rate .......................................................................... 19 G
Salary Payments ...............................................................................19 N
Salary Schedule ............................................................ 19 A, Appendix E
School Advisory Council (SAC) .......................................................... 15 F
School Assignments (Employee’s Children) ....................................... 19 U
School Board Policies ........................................................................ 34 L
School Budget for Faculty Council ....................................................17 B
School Calendar ................................................................................... 27
School Closings, Emergency ................................................................. 28
School Facilities ..................................................................................7 C
School Improvement Funding ......................................................... 15 F 4
School Improvement Grant (SIG) ...................................................... 31 D
School Improvement Plan (SIP) ....................................................... 15 F 3
School Improvement Plan (SIP), Goals, Professional Development ..... 5 L 7
School Visitation ............................................................................... 29 J
Secondary Preparation/Conference Time ...........................................10 B
Seclusion and Restraint of Children with Disabilities..............Appendix M
Secret Ballot Vote.......................................................................... 15 G 3
Secretarial Services ............................................................................ 6 M
                                                BTU INDEX
                                               Page 13 of 16

Subject                                                                                     Article/Section

Selection of Department Chairpersons,
    Grade Level Chairpersons, and Team Leaders ................................... 9 A
Selection of SAC ................................................................................ 15 F
Seniority .............................................................................................3 E
Seniority, Assigned by ................................................................... 25 D 3
Seniority, Reduction by ................................................................. 25 D 2
Shared Governance ........................................................................... 15 E
Sick Leave ......................................................................................... 23 A
Sick Leave accumulated in other Florida Districts .......................... 23 A 1
Sick Leave Bank................................................................................ 23 R
Sick Leave Buy Back ........................................................................ 21 D
Sick Leave Committee .................................................................... 23 R 3
Sick Leave, Donation to a family member .......................................... 23 V
Sick Leave, Use of .......................................................................... 23 A 4
Sign Out Sheets .................................................................................. 6 P
6th Period Pay ................................................................................ 19 G 2
Sole Bargaining Agent ....................................................................... 29 R
Special Activities ............................................................................... 19 K
Special Assistance............................................................................. 11 J
Special Program Experience ............................................................. 19 H
Special Subject Teachers ................................................................... 10 F
Starting Time ...................................................................................... 5 T
State Convention...............................................................................29 N
Steward Designation .............................................................. Appendix H
Steward, Signature after election ..................................................... 5 G 6
Steward Super-seniority ............................................. 6 F 4, 25 D 6, 29 W
Stipends ....................................................................................... 19 C,R
Storage/Materials ...............................................................................5 B
Straight Leveling Model, Insurance.............................................. 22 B 1 c
Student Discipline ............................................................................... 11
    Strategies to improve................................................................... 11 J
Student Discipline File ....................................................................... 11 I
Student Discipline Plan ..................................................................... 11 F
    Faculty Vote ............................................................................. 11 E 4
Student Referral Form............................................................ Appendix D
Student Removal & Placement Review Committee ............................. 11 P
Students placed with volunteer teachers ...........................................35 C
Student Teachers, Number of ............................................................16 B
Student Teacher used as a substitute ...............................................16 C
Student Teaching Assignments ............................................................ 16
Submission of Grades .........................................................................8 E
                                               BTU INDEX
                                              Page 14 of 16

Subject                                                                                   Article/Section

Subpoena ......................................................................................... 23 F
Substitute Notification ........................................................................6 B
Substitutes .........................................................................................6 C
Substitute Status Changed to Full Time Employee ............................ 19 E
Summer Paychecks/Contractual Pay ............................................. 19 N 2
Summer Savings Account .............................................................. 19 N 3
Summer School Agreement ............................................................... 30 F
Summer School Employment .............................................................. 6 F
Summer School Employment Qualifications ..................................... 6 F 3
Summer School, Professional Leave to attend ................................... 23 G
Superintendent’s Insurance Advisory Committee ......................... 22 B 1 a
Super-seniority for Stewards ............................................................ 29 W
Supervision of Employees................................................................... 6 H
Supervisory Duties ............................................................................. 6 G
Supervisory Teacher, Qualifications to be .......................................... 16 A
Supplementary Pay Positions ............................................................ 19 F
Supplementary Pay Schedule ................................................. Appendix F
Surplus/Involuntary Transfers......................................................... 25 D

Task Assignment Supplement ........................................................... 19 K
TDA’s and Substitute Notification ........................................................6 B
Teacher Corp Training Program ............................................... Appendix I
Teacher Directed Improvement Fund (TDIF) .................................23 D 17
Teacher Orientation Program, New ..................................................... 5 W
Teacher Planning Days ...................................................................... 5 KL
Teacher's Primary Responsibility ......................................................... 5 A
Teaching Assignments.........................................................................4 B
Teaching Assignments, Alternative ................................................... 10 G
Teaching Experience, Credit for ......................................................... 19 E
Teaching, Interruptions to .................................................................. 5 O
Teaching Position While On Leave ..................................................... 23 L
Teaching Stations ..................................................................... 5 C, 10 E
Team Leaders......................................................................................... 9
Telephones......................................................................................... 5 G
Temporary Duty Leave ...................................................................... 23 E
Tentative Assignments ........................................................................4 C
Testing Materials (Adequate & Appropriate) .........................................8 B
Terminal Pay .................................................................................. 23 A 5
Terms of Agreement ............................................................................. 36
Threats of Violence, Reporting ........................................................ 11 K 2
Time Frame for Waivers ................................................................ 15 G 2
                                                BTU INDEX
                                               Page 15 of 16

Subject                                                                                    Article/Section

Time Limits of grievances .................................................................. 34 F
Tolls, Reimbursement for ................................................................... 19 I
Tools for Schools Program ................................................................... 7 J
Trade Organization Membership..........................................................6 N
Training (Accountability) ..................................................................15 C
Training Plan .................................................................................... 35 A
Transfer Window ............................................................................ 25 C 4
Transfer to Low Performing School Incentive ..................................... 19 A
Transfers and Reassignments .............................................................. 25
Transition Team ............................................................................... 15 H
Travel Reimbursement ...................................................................... 19 J
Typing/Copying Equipment ................................................................8 C

Underpayments in Paycheck ......................................................... 19 Q 1
Union Leave ..................................................................................... 29 O
Union Meetings, Release time ............................................................ 29 Y
Union Representation ....................................................................... 18 A
Union Rights ........................................................................................ 29
Unsafe/Hazardous Conditions ............................................................ 7 A
Use of Planning Days ......................................................................... 5 M
Use of Sick Leave ........................................................................... 23 A 4

Vacancies at New School, Procedures to Fill ...................................... 25 F
Vandalism, Automobile Reimbursement ........................................ 22 H 2
Vending Machines ............................................................................... 5 P
Verification of Course Completion .................................................... 19 D
Verification of Leave ..........................................................................23 C
Virtual Schools Program Calendar .....................................................27 B
Visitation, School .............................................................................. 29 J
Vocational Education .......................................................................... 4 A
Voluntary In-service/Stipend Rate .................................................... 19 R
Voluntary Participation .................................................................... 19 M
Voluntary Transfers ..........................................................................25 C
Voting Procedure, Challenge.......................................................... 15 G 5

Waiver to grievance ........................................................................... 34 K
Waivers ............................................................................................ 15 G
Waivers, Secret Ballot Vote............................................................ 15 G 3
Waivers, Time Frame..................................................................... 15 G 2
Withdrawal Rights and Procedures (Sick Leave Bank)..................... 23 R 4
Workday, Length .................................................................................5 E
                                              BTU INDEX
                                             Page 16 of 16

Subject                                                                                 Article/Section

Workshops ..................................................................................... 19 R 2
Written Notice of Status ................................................................... 20 H
Written Statement ............................................................................ 11 H

Year Round Pay ............................................................................. 19 N 1


8/23/11 - jh
