Table of Content | Manual Search | Comments

Davis School District Policy and Procedures

Subject:      8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement - 2008-2009
Index:        Negotiated Agreement
Revised:      July 1, 2008

1.     ARTICLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS

       1.1    In line with the constancy of the Board's policy of not discriminating against any teacher
              because of race, creed, color, sex, national origin, age, religion, disability or marital status
              and the Association's standing rule to admit persons to membership without discrimination
              on the basis of race, color, creed, national origin, sex, age, religion, disability or marital
              status, it is agreed that none of these conditions will be pre-conditions of employment.
              1.1.1 The Davis Board of Education and the employee association(s) recognize mutual
                        responsibility to comply with all relevant provisions of the Americans with
                        Disabilities Act (ADA) in providing reasonable accommodations to qualified
                        individuals with disabilities.
       1.2    The Board and the Association understand that the Board has certain powers and
              responsibilities that under the Constitution and Laws of the State of Utah may not be
              delegated to another group or organization. Accordingly, if any provisions of this
              Agreement or any application of this Agreement to any teacher covered hereby shall be
              found contrary to law, such provision or application shall have effect only to the extent
              permitted by law. All other provisions or application of this Agreement shall continue in
              full force and effect.
       1.3    No change, revision, alteration or modification of this Agreement in whole or in part shall
              be valid unless the same is ratified by both the Board and the Association and is endorsed
              in writing by both parties.
       1.4    This Agreement shall be deemed to be a part of each individual teacher's contract by
              reference thereof.
       1.5    The terms of this agreement are effective as of July 1, 2008.

2.     ARTICLE II RECOGNITION

       2.1    Having been identified as the exclusive bargaining agent under Board Policy, the Board of
              Education recognizes the Davis Education Association (“the Association”) as the
              exclusive representative of the licensed personnel except as herein provided. Any
              individual teacher shall have the right to present grievances, with or without
              representation by the Association, in accordance with the Grievance Procedure provided.
              Nothing in this Agreement shall be so construed as to deprive any individual of his/her
              rights under the Utah Right to Work Law nor his/her rights as set forth in Title IV of the
              Civil Rights Act or under Chapter 34, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, or amendments
              thereto.
       2.2    The Davis Education Association recognizes the Board of Education as having all the
              rights and powers as provided in the constitution and the laws of the State of Utah.
       2.3    The Board shall continue to recognize the Association as the exclusive representative for
              the term of this Agreement or any renewal thereof as long as there is verification of
              representation.
       2.4    Employee associations may use the buildings for meetings and membership drives.
              These meetings shall be without cost and include the use of faculty rooms, class rooms,
              auditoriums, and multipurpose (cafeteria) rooms. These meetings should not interfere

                                                                                                      Page 1
                                                                    8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

             with the normal operation of the school where teachers are working with students and
             should follow other District policies.
     2.5     EXCLUSIVITY
             2.5.1 The rights and privileges of the teachers' organization and its representatives as
                      set forth in this article shall be granted only to the Association as the exclusive
                      bargaining agent of teachers.
             2.5.2 Verification of Representation
                      Recognition, once effective as to the unit described above, shall be effective
                      during each year of the term of this continuing contract, or any renewal thereof.
             2.5.3 Employee Associations Use of Facilities
                      Employee associations may use the District delivery system (pony), place notices,
                      circulars, and other materials on designated bulletin boards and in teachers'
                      mailboxes.. Authorized representatives of the associations will assume
                      responsibility for the posting or distributing of material for the associations. When
                      appropriate, such materials shall be signed.
     2.6     EXCEPTED PERSONNEL
             This agreement shall include all personnel except:
     Substitute Workers             Supervisors                      Assistant Superintendents
     Seasonal Employees             Administrative Specialists       Associate Superintendents
     Classified Employees           Directors                        Business Administrator
     District Coordinators          Assistant Directors              Superintendent
     Assistant Principals           Administrative Assistants
     Principals                     School Directors

             Licensed educators working as School Technology Specialists will be paid according to
             District Salary Table 6 but are otherwise covered under the provisions of this agreement.

3.   ARTICLE III NEGOTIATIONS PROCEDURE


     3.1     CONDUCTING NEGOTIATIONS
             3.1.1 On a mutually agreed upon date, the parties shall initiate negotiations for the
                   purpose of entering into a succeeding agreement.
             3.1.2 The negotiation teams shall consist of an equal number of Association
                   representatives and representatives designated by the Board of Education. The
                   exact number shall be mutually agreed to by the Association President and the
                   Superintendent or his/her designee.
             3.1.3 During negotiations, upon reasonable request of either party, the other will make
                   available for inspection its records and data relevant to the subject of
                   negotiations.
             3.1.4 Salary and Benefit items will be negotiated every year. Policy issues will be
                   negotiated during odd–numbered years and will be limited to ten (10) such items
                   per party. This will not preclude discussion of proposed changes at any time
                   through the Liaison process.
             3.1.5 If negotiations are scheduled during the school day, negotiators shall be given
                   released time from their regular educational assignments.
     3.2     DISPUTE RESOLUTION
             3.2.1 Impasse. If agreement cannot be reached through the negotiation process
                   within ninety (90) calendar days of the first formal negotiation session, either party
                   may declare impasse. A declaration of impasse must be in writing and must state
                   the disputed issues. A copy of the declaration must be submitted to each


                                                                                                   Page 2
                                                             8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

              negotiation team before being released to any other party.
      3.2.2   Appointment of Mediator. On impasse, the issues in dispute will be submitted
              to mediation. The State Superintendent shall appoint a mediator within five (5)
              days after receiving the written request for appointment of a mediator. The
              mediator will be mutually acceptable to the School Board and the DEA. The
              mediator shall meet with the parties or their representatives, either jointly or
              separately, and shall take such other steps as may be deemed appropriate in
              order to persuade the parties to resolve their differences and effect a mutually
              acceptable agreement. For the purpose of mediation, parties agree to fully
              comply with the requests of the mediator. The expenses of the mediation shall be
              paid equally by the parties.
      3.2.3 Fact Finding. If the mediator is unable to effect settlement of the controversy
              within thirty (30) calendar days after the declaration of impasse, either party may,
              by written notice to the other, request that all unresolved issues be submitted to
              fact finding. Either party may request the Utah chapter of the American
              Arbitration Association to provide a list, not to exceed five names, of individuals to
              perform fact finding. On receipt of the list, the parties shall determine by lot which
              party is to strike the first name from the list. The parties shall alternately strike
              names from the list until only one name remains. The person whose name is not
              struck from the list shall be the fact finder.
              (1)       Procedures for Fact Finding. The fact finder shall, within ten (10)
                        calendar days after being appointed, meet with the parties or their
                        representatives, jointly or separately, and make inquiries and
                        investigations, hold hearings, and take such other steps as deemed
                        appropriate. For the purpose of such hearings, investigations, and
                        inquiries, the fact finder shall have the power to require the attendance
                        and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence. The parties
                        agree to fully comply with the requests of the fact finder.
              (2)       All expenses of the fact finder shall be borne equally by the parties. Each
                        party shall be responsible for the expenses of the witnesses it calls.
              (3)       The fact finder shall make a report of findings of fact and
                        recommendations to both parties within fourteen (14) calendar days of
                        the end of the hearing.
              (4)       If the parties are unable to reach agreement, either party may, after ten
                        (10) calendar days following the receipt of the fact finder's report, make
                        the report public.
      3.2.4 General. Where a written notice is required in this section, the notice shall be
              either personally delivered or mailed, postage prepaid, to the President of the
              Association or to the Superintendent.
              The parties agree to fully cooperate with each other to facilitate mediation and
              fact finding.
              The provisions of this Agreement relating to mediation and fact finding do not
              expire with this Agreement. The President of the Association and the
              Superintendent may mutually agree to extend any of the dates set forth in this
              section, not to exceed ten (10) days, if such agreement is made in writing.
3.3   DISTRIBUTION OF DAVIS EDUCATORS AGREEMENT
      This agreement shall be entered in the District electronic information system and be
      accessible through the District web site in the policy manual section. Copies of the
      current agreement also shall be distributed annually to all District administrators and
      Association building representatives. A copy of the agreement shall be available in the
      administrative office and faculty room of each school.



                                                                                            Page 3
                                                                      8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

4.    ARTICLE IV CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT

      4.1       CONTRACT YEAR
            4.1.1 Contract Days
                  [a]    Full-time educators in schools on a traditional calendar will work 188 days;
                         those in schools on a year-round calendar will work 180 days.
                  [b]    Seven contract days will be designated as Quality Teaching days and will be
                         funded through the Quality Teaching Block Grant. These days will be used for
                         activities that support the school, department/grade level and individual
                         professional development activities as outlined by each site’s School
                         Improvement Plan. Activities scheduled for Quality Teaching days shall focus
                         on improving classroom instruction and student learning, and may include: data
                         gathering, data organization, data analysis, accreditation activities, and other
                         research-based activities which support student achievement and the School
                         Improvement Plan. Special educators and related servers have specialized job
                         and legal requirements. In lieu of the curriculum-directed quality teaching
                         contract day prior to the start of the school year, these educators will use the
                         equivalent 7.5 hours (to be worked incrementally throughout the school year)
                         for meetings, training, and State file compliance requirements.
                  [c]    One contract day will be scheduled prior to the beginning of each school year
                         and will be reserved for individual and team planning activities. School and
                         District meetings and activities will not be held during this time.
                  [d]    In addition to the contract days noted in [a], educators will be paid their hourly
                         rate for 6.4 hours of planning and preparation. These hours may be worked on-
                         site at the educator’s discretion, but must be completed by October 31st.
                  [e]    Each year, the District may conduct orientation/training sessions for educators
                         who are hired that year. Newly employed educators are obligated to attend
                         these orientations in addition to the contract days in 4.1.1[a].
                  [f]    Contract days are subject to the Leave Provisions in section 5.11.
                  [g]    Educators receive no paid holidays or vacations.
     4.2    SALARY DETERMINATIONS
            4.2.1 Determining Accredited Teaching Experience
                  In determining accredited teaching experience for educators hired effective July 1,
                  2000, or later, credit will be allowed for the first ten (10) years of qualified teaching
                  experience outside the District and for all teaching experience in the District except
                  when rehiring individuals who previously have retired from the District. Davis School
                  District retirees with at least ten (10) years of experience who are rehired on a teacher
                  salary schedule shall be placed on step eleven (11) of that schedule.
                  [a]    However, the Superintendent may authorize salary credit for teaching
                         experience beyond
                         ten (10) years in the following situations:
                         (i)     when a fully qualified applicant cannot be recruited at the ten-year salary
                                 rate;
                         (ii)    when an applicant is hired whose qualifications substantially exceed
                                 those of the other candidates for the same position; or
                         (iii) when the Superintendent determines that the District's best interests
                                 would be served by granting salary credit for additional experience.
                  [b]    However, salary credit for teaching experience shall not exceed the actual total
                         amount of previous teaching experience.
                  [c]    Allowable teaching experience shall be based upon relevant teaching
                         experience which is verified by the organization where employment took place.
                  [d]    At the time of employment the District shall evaluate experience in private


                                                                                                    Page 4
                                                           8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

              schools, institutions of higher education, or other professional employment, and
              grant credit if approved by the Superintendent of Schools.
        [e]   The Board reserves the right to further limit accredited teaching experience
              outside the District.
        [f]   In granting salary credit for qualifying experience outside the Davis School
              District, the District shall:
              (i)    grant one (1) year of credit for each year of full-time experience;
              (ii)   grant one (1) year of credit for any two (2) half-time or three (3) quarters
                     time years of experience;
              (iii) deny credit for any partial year of experience that when combined with
                     another partial year of experience does not equal one (1) year as defined
                     in (ii);
              (iv) deny credit for military experience; and
              (v)    deny credit for any experience outside the United States for which the
                     Utah State Office of Education does not reimburse the District.
        [g]   Teacher Exchange Program
              A teacher will be allowed to transfer to the Davis District, without loss of
              experience credit, by following this process:
              (i)    Find a teacher in the Davis District who would agree to transfer to the
                     district from which the transferring teacher would be coming. That
                     teacher must have approximately the equivalent length of service.
              (ii)   Gain the approval of both principals and districts for the transfer.
              (iii) Have the approval of the other district that full credit will be given for all
                     teaching experience.
              (iv) The Davis District will then agree to hire the other teacher with full credit
                     for his or her teaching experience.
              (v)    This supersedes the provisions of 4.2 relative to limiting the credit for
                     teaching experience.
4.2.2   Allowance for Special Services
        [a]   The Board of Education may grant to teachers an amount not to exceed $500
              above the basic schedule for special services. No compensation for special
              services shall be considered as "salary" or "pay." The award of any amount for
              special services shall not establish any right or expectation for any continuing
              award and the award may be terminated upon reassignment of the recipient.
        [b]   Full-time special education classroom teachers may be authorized two (2) days
              of released time upon the approval of the principal and the special education
              director. These days may be scheduled at anytime during the school year, but
              must be utilized to provide on-site time for planning, paperwork completion and
              conferencing for I.E.P.'s.
4.2.3   Frozen Salaries
        The Board of Education reserves the right to hold an employee's salary at any level if
        that employee's work is not entirely satisfactory. Before this policy is applied,
        employees affected will be notified in writing at least sixty (60) days in advance of
        such action.
4.2.4   Rate of Pay
        [a]   The daily rate of pay for licensed personnel is determined by dividing the
              applicable annual salary as found in Teachers Salary Schedule (Sec. 4.16 and
              4.17) by the total number of contract days as listed above in Section 4.1.1.
        [b]   The hourly rate of pay for licensed personnel is determined by dividing the daily
              rate of pay by eight (8).
4.2.5   Extended Year Contracts
        [a]   Secondary Librarians are approved to work five (5) days beyond the teachers’


                                                                                           Page 5
                                                          8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

              standard contract. These days may be scheduled either before or after the
              regular teacher contract days in consultation with the school principal.
        [b]   Secondary School Counselors working full-time are authorized to work fifteen
              (15) additional days beyond the teachers’ standard contract. These days, or
              the equivalent number of hours, may be scheduled either before or after the
              standard teacher contract days, or hours, and shall be reported to the Director
              of Counselors and Comprehensive Guidance. Secondary counselors working
              part-time shall receive a prorated number of days/hours.
        [c]   Licensed Special Educators and Related Servers are authorized fifteen (15)
              additional hours beyond the teachers’ standard contract to complete paperwork
              related to their assignments. These hours may be scheduled before or after the
              standard teacher school days. The hours shall be verified by the school
              administrator and submitted in increments of not less than 3.5 hours.
        [d]   Educators’ daily or hourly rates of pay will apply to extended year contracts.
4.2.6   Qualifications for Additional Salary Lanes
        [a]   Deadlines
              (i)    All completed lane change requests must be submitted to Human
                     Resources on or before the 1st of the month to allow the appropriate
                     salary adjustments for any earnings subsequent to that date. If proper
                     documentation is submitted at the time of application, salary adjustments
                     will normally be reflected in the following month's check. In the event that
                     proper documentation cannot be provided at the time of application, but
                     all course work is completed before the date of application, a thirty (30)
                     calendar day period will be allowed to provide proper documentation, with
                     the salary adjustment retroactive to the time it would have taken effect
                     had proper documentation been provided at the time of application. In
                     order to qualify for the retroactive salary adjustment, the employee must
                     submit with the application a letter clearly identifying all documentation
                     that is omitted; and the application, except for the missing documentation,
                     must be complete. Any salary adjustments for lane change requests
                     submitted after the first of the month of the last full month worked will not
                     be included in any payments on the current contract year but instead will
                     be reflected on payments beginning the next contract year.
              (ii)   Requests (including proper documentation) received by the 1st of the
                     month deadline, but taking longer to approve, will be processed
                     retroactive to the 1st of the month following the month of the original
                     submission.
        [b]   Provisions
              (i)    Courses which carry college credit must be granted from accredited
                     institutions of higher education, and the accreditation must be recognized
                     and accepted by the Utah State Office of Education.
              (ii)   In order to be eligible for lane change credit, courses cannot be part of
                     the requirements for the educator’s bachelors degree or original teacher
                     licensure.
              (iii) Educators who receive a masters degree and are placed on the
                     BS+75/Masters lane may thereafter submit any eligible course credits
                     towards subsequent lane changes, as long as the courses were not
                     required for completion of the masters degree and have not previously
                     been counted towards a lane change. Educators who attain the BS+60
                     lane prior to being placed on the Masters lane may also thereafter
                     receive lane change credit for courses required as part of their Masters
                     program provided that the individual courses have not been applied


                                                                                          Page 6
                                                   8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

            towards prior lane changes.
      (iv)  Credits which are not acceptable to the District Lane Change Committee
            will be rejected, the reasons therefore stated and communicated to the
            applicant. Applications (including proper documentation) that are
            approved will be maintained in the employee's District personnel file.
      (v)   Upon approval, all requests shall be endorsed by a representative of the
            committee and forwarded to the Superintendent's Office for review and
            implementation according to procedures agreed to by the Board of
            Education and Davis Education Association.
[c]   Courses Considered for Lane Change Credit
      (i)   Graduate Credit:
            (1) Graduate course work need not be related to the educator’s
                   present teaching assignment.
            (2) Must be submitted with supporting documents explaining the
                   numeration system when proof of graduate credit is not defined on
                   the transcript.
            (3) Educators whose assignments require specialist certification
                   necessitating a masters degree of at least eighty (80) quarter hours
                   beyond a bachelors degree shall be placed on lane 5 (masters + 30
                   hours) of the teacher salary schedule. Eligible specialists
                   requesting such lane placement shall provide written
                   documentation verifying that their masters degree program required
                   at least eighty (80) quarter hours beyond a bachelors degree for
                   Utah certification.
      (ii)  Undergraduate Credit:
            (1) May not be approved unless classes are directly related to one's
                   teaching assignment. If not directly related, courses require
                   approval from the District Lane Change Committee. Forms for
                   undergraduate approval are available from the Human Resources
                   Department.
            (2) Approval will not be granted for classes taken before September 1,
                   1976.
      (iii) In-service Hours:
            (1) Must be approved by the Utah State Office of Education. Courses
                   taken prior to September 1987 must be verified by submitting
                   official certificates of completion.
            (2) Approval will not be granted for classes taken before September 1,
                   1974.
            (3) Inservice hours completed prior to 1987 may account for no more
                   than half of the hours required for a lane change.
            (4) Educators may request from the Davis District Staff Development
                   Department written documentation of State Office of Education
                   lane change/recertification credit. Documentation normally shall be
                   available one month following the last session of a course or
                   workshop. A listing of District in-service courses will be made
                   available to teachers.
[d]   Course Documentation
      (ii)  Documentation of successful course completion must be submitted on an
            original transcript of credits, original report card, or an original letter from
            the instructor on school letterhead from the institution awarding the credit.
      (ii)  Undergraduate courses not directly related to an educator's current
            teaching assignment must be accompanied by a Lane Change


                                                                                    Page 7
                                                                8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                              Committee Approval Form.
              [e]      District Lane Change Committee
                       The District Lane Change Committee of the Davis School District shall be
                       comprised of six (6) licensed staff members appointed by the Board of
                       Education of the Davis School District., The chair shall be appointed by the
                       Superintendent of Schools. Initial committee members shall be appointed for
                       terms of two (2) years and shall serve until June 30th when new members will
                       be appointed. Replacements will be appointed in the event a member is not
                       able to complete his/her assigned term.
      4.2.7 National Board Certification
                Educators with current National Board Certification will receive a stipend of one-
                thousand dollars ($1,000) per year in addition to their regular salary. Evidence of
                current National Board Certification shall be provided to the District Human
                Resources Department.
4.3   WORKSPACE
      It is the goal of the District that all educators have an adequate physical space in which to
      work. Areas which are to be used for teaching, testing, small group instruction or counseling
      of students must be large enough to accommodate the number of students involved in these
      activities. In addition, the space must have adequate light, ventilation, heat, electrical
      connections and furniture. Any educator who feels that the space to which he/she has been
      assigned is not adequate and that such inadequacy will impact his/her ability to work
      effectively with students shall be entitled to a review of that workspace. Such review will be
      conducted by a team containing one representative designated by the superintendent and one
      representative designated by the Association.
4.4   ELEMENTARY PLANNING TIME
      All elementary schools will allow for teacher planning time on one (1) day each week, as
      approved by the Board of Education, by shortening that day and proportionately lengthening
      the remaining days in the week. In the event that the early-out day falls on a holiday, no early-
      out planning time will be provided for that week.
      4.4.1 The planning time is to be used for individual or group planning activities and not for
                faculty meetings, training or other routine school activities unless agreed upon by the
                JSSC.
      4.4.2 The total time for students to be in the class shall meet the state requirements and the
                total teacher time shall meet contract obligations.
4.5   ELEMENTARY PREPARATION TIME
      All elementary educators, including special education and reading teachers, will receive the
      equivalent of forty-five (45) minutes per day of preparation time during the contract day.
      Teachers are expected to use this time in direct preparation for their classroom teaching. The
      principal, in cooperation with the staff and the JSSC, will determine how to structure the
      preparation program for their school. The preparation schedule may be modified for special
      activities if agreed upon by the JSSC after consultation with the faculty.
      By mutual agreement of the contract negotiating teams, an elementary preparation time
      committee may be convened to evaluate and recommend changes to the Elementary Prep
      Time Program. Such committee will be made up of an equal number of educators, classified
      employees, and administrators. This committee will make recommendations to the
      negotiation teams about how future funding can best be
      used to promote high quality instruction within the preparation time program.
      4.5.1 Elementary preparation time will include the following components:
                [a]    Each school will receive funds sufficient to provide a minimum of one-hundred-
                       twenty (120) minutes preparation time per teacher per week. The funds may be
                       used for hiring either certified teachers, paraprofessionals or a combination of
                       the two to provide preparation time.


                                                                                               Page 8
                                                                   8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

              [b]      An additional hour of preparation time will be provided for each teacher through
                       a combination of Library Media and Computer Lab.
               [c]     Each school will employ personnel sufficient to provide a minimum of forty-five
                       (45) minutes of clerical and/or teacher assistant time per teacher per week.
               [d]     Reasonable efforts shall be made to secure substitutes for elementary
                       preparation time employees who are absent.
4.6   TRADITIONALLY-SCHEDULED ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS
      As far as possible, all classes on a grade level will be equalized in enrollment. In some
      instances, a school may choose to begin the year with slightly lower enrollment in classes in
      which a teacher has an English as a Second Language (ESL) endorsement to accommodate
      English Language Learners (ELL) who enroll after the school year begins.
4.7   YEAR-ROUND SCHOOLS
      4.7.1 To accommodate the challenges of year-round school staffing and to avoid schedule
               conflicts for educators and their families, educators living within the District will be
               allowed to have their children attend the school where they work when there is space
               available. Requests must be submitted in writing to the District Student Services
               Department in accordance with the student transfer policy.
      4.7.2 Educators with children attending year-round schools will be given first consideration
               to have their children's track assignment coincide with their teaching track
               assignment. Requests must be made in a timely manner.
      4.7.3 Elementary
               [a]     Track enrollment: As far as possible each track on a grade level will be
                       equalized in numbers. New students will begin with their assigned track.
               [b]     Rotation days will be conducted on an early-out day. Whenever possible a
                       desk for each teacher will be provided.
               [c]     Early-out days will be required at year-round schools on track change day for
                       the track going off.
               [d]     A secured storage area will be provided for teachers during their off-track
                       period.
               [e]     The District departments scheduling in-service training shall make an effort to
                       schedule the training during off track times throughout the school year.
               [f]     Kindergarten teachers in year-round schools shall not be assigned to teach
                       multiple tracks.
      4.7.4 Track Change Reimbursement
               [a]     Funds are provided for the purpose of assisting year-round educators who have
                       to use time beyond contract hours to move into their classrooms.
               [b]     Teachers who are required to rotate rooms shall receive an hourly stipend, with
                       a maximum of four (4) hours per track change for time spent above and beyond
                       the contract hours. The stipend will be paid at the rate specified in Section
                       4.11.4 [b].
      4.7.5 Attendance During Track Changes
               Only in the event of extenuating circumstances will teachers be permitted to take
               personal leave on regularly scheduled parent/teacher conference days and the first
               day and last two (2) days of their track assignment.
4.8   JUNIOR HIGH FRIDAY EARLY OUT
      All junior high schools will allow for teacher planning time to support middle level philosophy
      and implementation on one (1) day each week. This will be accomplished by shortening the
      day and proportionately lengthening the remaining days in the week. In the event that early-
      out day falls on a holiday, no early-out planning time will be provided for that week.
      4.8.1 The planning time is to be used for department, team, and/or individual planning
               activities and not for faculty meetings, training, or other routine school activities unless
               agreed upon by the JSSC.


                                                                                                   Page 9
                                                                  8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

      4.8.2   The total time for students to be in class shall meet the state requirements and the
              total teacher time shall meet contract obligations.
4.9 HIGH SCHOOL LATE START
     High schools will start late on the first Friday of each month, as approved by the Board of
     Education. Each school’s JSSC will have input into the use of this time, which is intended to
     support small learning communities.
4.10 SUBSTITUTE TEACHERS
     When a substitute teacher (including resource and reading teachers) is required because of
     teacher illness or other teacher absence, the teacher shall notify the principal and shall follow
     the procedures designated for arranging for a substitute through the District automated
     substitute teacher program. Teachers shall notify their principal and shall arrange for a
     substitute as far in advance of their anticipated absence as possible. Teachers anticipating
     absence due to illness shall inform their principal no later than the notification deadline
     established by the school. Each principal shall determine the appropriate notification deadline
     for his/her school and shall inform school staff of this deadline. After meeting the notification
     requirements listed above, teachers absent due to illness should not be required to return to
     their teaching position in cases when substitutes are not found. Similarly, teachers who have
     met the above requirements in order to attend an approved District inservice or workshop,
     should not be required to cancel except as a last resort on an emergency basis. Under normal
     circumstances, the teacher has the responsibility to provide the substitute with appropriate
     lesson plans, seating charts and classroom procedures.
     4.10.1 The teaching staff shall indicate to the principal those substitutes who have been
              satisfactory and may recommend a specific teacher.
     4.10.2 The teacher may contact the substitute teacher previously agreed upon with the
              principal to provide additional instructions. If it is anticipated that the absence will be
              more than two (2) days, the principal may ask the teacher to personally contact the
              substitute previously agreed upon to make the specific arrangements.
     4.10.3 To provide maximum assistance to substitute teachers, adequate plans and proper
              directions shall be provided.
     4.10.4 Qualified teachers shall be identified on an approved list considering past
              performance, training and ability and shall be given preference where practicable.
     4.10.5 Substitute teachers shall provide a daily report of class activities and assignments to
              the teacher and/or principal. Such reports shall be attached to the teachers lesson
              plans.
     4.10.6 Davis teachers serving as substitutes for teachers will be paid at the long-term
              substitute rate. The substitute rate shall be pro-rated to an hourly basis if the
              assignment is for fewer than three (3) hours per day.
     4.10.7 When the automated sub-finder system is not successful in filling an absence, or
              when prior principal approval is obtained, teachers within a school who fill in for
              absent teachers will be granted additional personal leave on an hour-for-hour basis.
              This will apply to teachers in secondary schools who substitute during their prep
              period or teachers in year-round elementary schools who substitute when they are off
              track. This leave shall be governed by the personal leave policy (section 5.17).
              Schools will be responsible for submitting monthly record of additional personal leave
              earned under this policy.
4.11 STAFF DEVELOPMENT
     4.11.1 Educators who are presenters in District compensated staff development classes
              shall be paid at their regular hourly rate of pay for each staff development hour taught
              and at the rate specified in Section 4.11.4 [b] for preparation time. Paid preparation
              time cannot exceed workshop teaching time.
     4.11.2 Attendance at staff development classes is voluntary when outside of contract hours
     4.11.3 Educators who choose to attend school-sponsored staff development classes may be


                                                                                                Page 10
                                                                8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

              compensated with a stipend as determined by the administrator. In addition, lane
              change credit and relicensure points may be offered.
     4.11.4 Counselors and related servers will receive two (2) hours or released time per month
              to attend District professional development activities.
4.12 PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITY AND ORGANIZATION FOR EXTRA DUTIES
     The contractual agreement with licensed educators sometimes involves a commitment of
     time and responsibility beyond the classroom and regular school hours. In secondary schools
     this may require supervision, direction and/or coaching of various clubs, activities and athletic
     teams. When such positions are open, the principal shall give first consideration to licensed
     educators employed at the site who have indicated an interest on the yearly reassignment
     request form. At the elementary level, it becomes necessary for teachers to assume the
     direction and supervision of their students throughout the school day as organized and
     directed by the principal. For all compensated extra duty and coaching assignments,
     principals will submit the names along with their positions and amounts of compensation to
     the Board of Education for formal approval. Compensation for extra duty shall not be
     considered as "salary" or "pay." Payment for extended contracts shall be considered
     compensation for extra duty. Compensation for extra duty may be withdrawn at any time
     upon reassignment of the recipient. Receipt of compensation for extra duty shall establish no
     right, expectation, or requirement that such assignment and compensation will continue in the
     future. Extra duty assignments may be modified or changed at any time. When either the
     educator or the principal wishes to discontinue an extra duty assignment, the parties will meet
     as early as possible to discuss the assignment. Whenever possible, changes in the
     assignment should be arranged prior to July 1 to ensure that both parties have adequate time
     to make alternative arrangements, if necessary.
     4.12.1 Lunch Supervision and Extra Duties — Elementary:
              [a]    The principal will seek volunteers from the licensed staff for lunch time
                     playground duty, lunchroom duty, before-and-after school bus duty, and before-
                     and-after school student supervision. In cases of no volunteers, use of teacher
                     assistants or paid community volunteers for these duties is recommended. In
                     case no volunteers or teacher assistants are available, then the principal may
                     select from the faculty individuals whom he/she desires to assume the
                     responsibility.
              [b]    Professional staff members who perform any of the duties listed above will be
                     paid at the rate of $13.94 per hour. The principal will submit a plan for payment
                     of extra duties to be approved by the Superintendent of Schools.
     4.12.2 Lunchroom Supervision — Secondary:
              The principal will submit a plan for payment of lunchroom supervision, including two
              (2) paid duty positions to be approved by the Superintendent of Schools. Principals
              will assign lunchroom supervision to teachers as an extra duty rather than in lieu of a
              regular class period wherever feasible. Pay shall be at the rate of $13.94 per hour.
     4.12.3 Elementary and Secondary Extended Teaching Contracts (Productivity):
              [a]    An extended teaching contract is defined as any specified number of teaching
                     hours in addition to a teacher's 7 1/2 hour regular contract where the additional
                     hours are spent teaching in the same program and school. Such a contract is
                     also known as productivity.
              [b]    Acceptance of a productivity teaching assignment shall not be required.
              [c]    Teacher compensation shall be calculated at an hourly rate based upon the
                     teacher's position on the salary schedule.
              [d]    In secondary schools, teachers will be paid for one (1) extra hour daily, which
                     allows for forty-five (45) minutes of teaching time and fifteen (15) minutes
                     preparation.
              [e]    Teacher compensation for extended teaching contracts shall be part of the


                                                                                             Page 11
                                                         8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

             regular monthly check. Teachers in secondary schools with A/B schedules will
             be paid for two (2) extra hours every other day.
4.12.4 Additional Educational Duties and Non-athletic Extra Duty
       [a]   Additional educational duties include teaching staff development classes,
             make-up classes, summer school, 3-6 high school, summer coaching clinics,
             and other assignments that involve teaching groups of students but which are
             not part of the regular school day.
             (i)   Educators performing these duties shall receive their hourly rate of pay
                   where class enrollment permits.
             (ii)  In the event that enrollment fees are insufficient to cover the instructor’s
                   salary and benefits and needed supplies, the educator may agree to work
                   for a reduced rate. If the educator does not agree, the course will be
                   cancelled.
             (iii) In no case will a teacher’s rate of pay be reduced once the course or
                   activity has begun.
       [b]   Non-athletic extra duties include those which do not involve direct instruction of
             groups of students, such as tutoring, monitoring study halls after school, track
             changes, etc. Educators performing these duties will be paid the hourly rate of
             a step 1, lane 1 educator.
       [c]   Educators who agree to take a Home Hospital assignment will be paid at the
             hourly rate of a Lane 1, Step 10 teacher.
       [d]   Educators who agree to perform specific tasks for which the work hours are not
             defined, such as web page creation or serving on a District committee, will be
             paid a stipend to be agreed upon by the educator and the supervisor.
4.12.5 Additional Compensation for Supervision of Extracurricular Activities — Secondary
       [a]   Athletic:
             Payment for the athletic assignments which involve time beyond the regular
             school assignment will be paid according to the following Junior High School
             and High School Coaches Pay Schedules.
       [b]   Junior High Coaching Extra Compensation Schedule




                                                                                      Page 12
                                                                           8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement




                                   DAVIS COUNTY SCHOOL DISTRICT
                     JUNIOR HIGH COACHING EXTRA COMPENSATION FOR EXTRA DUTIES
                                             2008-2009

Coaching Position                             Total Points         Coaches' Extra            Assistants' Extra
                                                                   Compensation               Compensation

Basketball                                         8                  1,087.00                    728.00

Wrestling                                          8                  1,087.00                    728.00

Volleyball                                         8                  1,087.00                    728.00

Track                                              8                  1,087.00                    728.00

Intramurals                                        7                   951.00                     637.00

1.       In addition to the above criteria, which shall be applied uniformly to the same assignments throughout
         the district, credit for years experience in teaching shall be granted as follows: 4-6 years, +5%; 7-10
         years, +10%; and 11 years and over, +15%. Each point is valued at $135.83.
2.       Assistant coaching salary is based upon 67% of varsity coaching salary.
3.       Intramurals is optional but must be carried on at least half of the school year and at least three days
         each week or an equivalent time period. There are two slots for intramurals.
4.      2008-2009 3.38% increase rounded to the nearest dollar.




                                                                                                                 Page 13
                                                                              8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement


                     [c]    Senior High Coaching Extra Compensation Schedule

                                      DAVIS COUNTY SCHOOL DISTRICT
                       SENIOR HIGH COACHING EXTRA COMPENSATION FOR EXTRA DUTIES
                                                2008-2009

Coaching Position                              Total Points          Coaches' Extra            Assistants' Extra
                                                                     Compensation               Compensation

Athletic Director                                                       4,758.00                      ---

Football                                            20                  2,717.00                   1,820.00

Basketball                                          20                  2,717.00                   1,820.00

Wrestling                                           18                  2,445.00                   1,638.00

Drill Team Director                                 18                  2,445.00                      ---

Swimming                                            16                  2,173.00                   1,456.00

Volleyball                                          13                  1,766.00                   1,183.00

Baseball                                            13                  1,766.00                   1,183.00

Track and Field                                     13                  1,766.00                   1,183.00

Softball                                            13                  1,766.00                   1,183.00

Soccer                                              13                  1,766.00                   1,183.00

Tennis                                              8                   1.087.00                      ---

Golf                                                8                   1.087.00                      ---

Cross Country                                       8                   1.087.00                      ---

1.         Assistant coaching salary is based upon 67% of the varsity coaching salary. Each point is valued at
           135.83.

2.         In addition to the above criteria, which shall be applied uniformly to the same assignments throughout
           the district, credit for years experience in teaching shall be granted as follows: 4-6 years, +5%; 7-10
           years, +10%; and 11 years and over, +15%.

3.       2008-2009 3.38% increase rounded to the nearest dollar.




                                                                                                                   Page 14
                                                                                            8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                          [d]     Non-Athletic:
                                  Extra compensation for non-athletic assignments which involve time beyond the
                                  regular school assignment will be paid according to the forms completed by
                                  each school as follows: (see charts (i) page 12 and (ii) page 13).
                                  The principal of each school will consult with the joint staff school committee in
                                  determining units to be assigned each position.
                                  (i)   Non-Athletic Junior High Application

                                             JUNIOR HIGH EXTRA DUTY ASSIGNMENTS

   SCHOOL:                                                               Date:__________________

   PRINCIPAL'S SIGNATURE:
   *Note: The classifications listed are suggested. Each unit is valued at $ 356.61 and any number of units may be assigned to each position
   to a total of 23.

               ASSIGNMENT                                             NAME                                       NUMBER OF UNITS

   Audio Visual

   Band

   Choral

   Orchestra

   Student Body

   Yearbook

   OTHER (Specify)




                                                                        TOTAL (NOT TO EXCEED 23)




Junior High Extra Duty Assignments Form




                                                                                                                                    Page 15
                                                                                  8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                              (ii)    Non-Athletic Senior High Application

                                           SENIOR HIGH EXTRA DUTY ASSIGNMENTS

 SCHOOL                                                                           Date

 PRINCIPAL'S SIGNATURE
  *Note: The classifications listed are suggested. Each unit is valued at $ 356.61 and any number of units may be assigned to each
 position to a total of 60.

        ASSIGNMENT                                           NAME                                        NUMBER OF UNITS
   th
 10 Grade Advisor

 11th Grade Advisor

 12th Grade Advisor

 Audio Visual Coordinator

  Band Director

 Cheerleader Advisor

 Choral Director

 Dance Advisor

 Debate Coach

 Drama Coach

 Newspaper Advisor

 Orchestra Director

 Pep Club Advisor

 Stage Crew Advisor

 Student Body Advisor

 Yearbook Advisor



 OTHERS (Specify)




                                                                  TOTAL (NOT TO EXCEED 60)




Senior High Extra Duty Assignment Forms




                                                                                                                      Page 16
                                                               8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

4.13 SPECIAL EDUCATION INCLUSION
     4.13.1 The Individual Education Plan (IEP) team for a student with a disability must include:
             the parents of the student, at least one regular education teacher of the student, at
             least one special education teacher, a representative of the Local Education Agency
             (LEA), a person who can interpret the instructional implications of the evaluation
             results (who may be another member of the team), and where appropriate, the
             student.
     4.13.2 If there are any problems related to getting appropriate team members to attend IEP
             meetings, the LEA representative will assume the responsibility for ensuring
             attendance.
     4.13.3 It is the responsibility of the special education teacher to collaborate with those
             regular education teachers whose educational services to the student are related to
             the goals and objectives outlined on the IEP. Whenever possible, a copy of the goals
             and objectives shall be provided to the receiving teacher(s) prior to the arrival of the
             student.
     4.13.4 Educational support services for the special education student are determined by the
             IEP process. When prescribed, such services may include consultation, training,
             materials, special staffing, equipment, or other related services.
     4.13.5 Any educator working with a special education student may request a review of the
             IEP. The teacher will provide documentation as to interventions used and placement
             issues at the IEP review meeting.
     4.13.6 Meetings scheduled during prep time or meetings that extend beyond contract hours
             should be arranged with the consent of teachers involved.
4.14 TRAVEL REIMBURSEMENT POLICY
     4.14.1 District Required Travel:
             The following shall apply for reimbursement of automobile expenses for the District
             required travel:
             [a]    A standard rate of reimbursement per mile shall be established by the Board of
                    Education.
             [b]    Teachers and related servers including diagnostic intervention specialists,
                    communicative disorders specialists, Chapter 1 teacher assistants, and others
                    similarly classified who are assigned duties at more than one school on the
                    same day shall be reimbursed for the distance traveled from the first school to
                    each subsequent school.
             [c]    Travel to required or assigned District meetings held on a continuing basis
                    (more than four (4) times during the school year) shall be reimbursed annually.
             [d]    Teachers serving as Home Hospital educators shall be entitled to mileage
                    reimbursement fro
                    travel between their school and the student’s home hospital location.
     4.14.2 Money received as travel reimbursement is not "salary" or "pay."
4.15 SECURITY OF PERSONAL VALUABLES
     Each teacher will be provided a space within the school to secure and lock personal
     valuables. When feasible, this space will be within or adjacent to the teacher’s classroom.
4.16 SCHEDULING CONSIDERATIONS
     To reduce scheduling conflicts for educators and their families, the following allowances will
     be made:
     4.16.1 Educators will be given additional consideration to have their children attend the
             school of their choice when there is space available. Requests must be submitted to
             the principal in accordance with the student transfer policy.
     4.16.2 Educators will be given additional consideration in selecting their children’s track
             assignment. Requests must be made in a timely manner.




                                                                                             Page 17
                                                                            8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

4.17 TEACHERS SALARY SCHEDULE — TEN (10) MONTHLY PAYMENT SCHEDULE
     See the following Ten (10) Monthly Payment Schedule and Twelve (12) Monthly Payment
     Schedule.

                          DAVIS SCHOOLS TEACHER SALARY SCHEDULE
                                  FOR 10 MONTHLY PAYMENTS
                                    SCHOOL YEAR 2008-2009
Salary       Bachelor       Bachelor +    Bachelor +     Masters or       Masters +     Masters +        PhD or EdD
Lane         Degree         20            40             Bachelor + 50    20            40
                            Semester      Semester       Semester Hrs     Semester      Semester
                            Hrs (30 Qtr   Hrs (60 Qtr    (75 Qtr Hrs)     Hrs (30 Qtr   Hrs (60 Qtr
                            Hrs)          Hrs)                            Hrs)          Hrs )

             188 Days        188 Days      188 Days        188 Days        188 Days       188 Days        188 Days

    1            33,169         34,507        35,833            36,943        38,051        39,162              40,269

    2            33,288         34,621        35,950            37,060        38,168        39,278              40,385

    3           334,185         35,521        36,847            37,958        39,066        40,178              41,285

    4            35,356         36,685        38,006            39,125        40,234        41,337              42,444

    5            36,750         37,900        39,231            40,333        41,439        42,548              43,655

    6            37,804         39,130        40,456            41,562        42,667        43,770              44,879

    7            39,107         40,441        41,765            42,872        43,979        45,087              46,186

    8            40,471         41,802        43,125            44,234        45,337        46,444              47,552

    9            41,882         43,219        44,538            45,647        46,754        47,858          48,959

    10           43,320         44,646        45,974            47,080        48,186        49,289          50,394

    11           44,809         46,131        47,459            48,566        49,674        50,778              51,882

    12           46,349         47,680        49,004            50,111        51,218        52,333              53,482

    13           47,953         49,282        50,603            51,714        52,843        54,015          55,206

    14           48,430         49,773        52,232            53,378        54,564        55,754              56,946

    15           48,430         49,773        52,773            55,180        56,374        57,561          58,750

    16           48,430         49,773        52,773            55,776        56,981        58,182          59,383

    17           48,430         49,773        52,773            55,776        56,981        58,182              59,383

    18           48,430         49,773        52,773            55,776        56,981        58,182              59,383

    19           48,430         49,773        52,773            55,776        56,981        58,182              59,383

    20           49,833         51,167        54,247            57,588        58,798        59,990              61,175

    21           50,331         51,678        54,831            58,209        59,432        60,637              61,837

    22           50,331         51,678        54,831            58,209        59,432        60,637              61,837

    23           50,331         51,678        54,831            58,209        59,432        60,637              61,837

    24           50,331         51,678        54,831            58,209        59,432        60,637              61,837

    25           51,430         52,839        56,125            59,584        60,836        62,069              63,296
1-Jul-08                                                                                              Table 1

Teachers with current National Board Certification will be paid an additional stipend of $1,000 per year.
A minimum of $1,700 was added to each cell in accordance with Legislative funding.
The Salary Schedule reflects a 188-day work year. 7 of the days are funded by the Quality Teaching Block Grant.




                                                                                                                   Page 18
                                                                                 8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

     4.18 TWELVE (12) MONTHLY PAYMENT SCHEDULE
              Teachers who take their checks over twelve (12) months shall receive an additional salary equal to the
              percentage of interest which reflects the actual District earnings on the deferred salary.

                                 DAVIS SCHOOLS TEACHER SALARY SCHEDULE
                                         FOR 12 MONTHLY PAYMENTS
                                          SCHOOL YEAR 2008-2009
     Salary         Bachelor      Bachelor +    Bachelor + 40   Masters or     Masters +     Masters +        PhD or
     Lane           Degree        20            Semester Hrs    Bachelor +     20            40               EdD
                                  Semester      (60 Qtr Hrs)    50 Semester    Semester      Semester
                                  Hrs (30 Qtr                   Hrs (75 Qtr    Hrs (30 Qtr   Hrs (60 Qtr
                                  Hrs)                          Hrs)           Hrs)          Hrs )
                                                188 Days
                     188 Days     188 Days                      188 Days       188 Days      188 Days         188 Days

         1              33,368        34,714         36,048          37,165        38,279        39,397          40,511

         2              33,488        34,829         36,166          37,282        38,397        39,514          40,627

         3              34,390        35,734         37,068          38,186        39,300        40,419          41,533

         4              35,568        36,905         38,234          39,360        40,475        41,585          42,699

         5              36,789        38,127         39,466          40,575        41,688        42,803          43,917

         6              38,031        39,365         40,699          41,811        42,923        44,033          45,148

         7              39,342        40,684         42,016          43,129        44,243        45,358          46,463

         8              40,714        42,053         43,384          44,499        45,609        46,723          47,837

         9              42,133        43,478         44,805          45,921        47,035        48,145          49,253

         10             43,580        44,914         46,250          47,362        48,475        49,585          50,696

         11             45,078        46,408         47,744          48,857        49,972        51,083          52,193

         12             46,627        47,966         49,298          50,412        51,525        52,647          53,803

         13             48,241        49,578         50,907          52,024        53,160        54,339          55,537

         14             48,721        50,072         52,545          53,698        54,891        56,089          57,288

         15             48,721        50,072         53,090          55,511        56,712        57,906          59,103

         16             48,721        50,072         53,090          56,111        57,323        58,531          59,739

         17             48,721        50,072         53,090          56,111        57,323        58,531          59,739

         18             48,721        50,072         53,090          56,111        57,323        58,531          59,739

         19             48,721        50,072         53,090          56,111        57,323        58,531          59,739

         20             50,132        51,474         54,572          57,934        59,151        60,350          61,542

         21             50,633        51,988         55,160          58,558        59,789        61,001          62,208

         22             50,633        51,988         55,160          58,558        59,789        61,001          62,208

        23              50,633        51,988         55,160          58,558        59,789        61,001          62,208

        24              50,633        51,988         55,160          58,558        59,789        61,001          62,208

        25              51,739        53,156         56,462          59,942        61,201        62,441          63,676

     1-Jul-08                                                                                              Table 1A

     Teachers with current National Board Certification will be paid an additional stipend of $1,000 per year.
     A minimum of $1,700 was added to each cell in accordance with Legislative funding.
     The Salary Schedule reflects a 188-day work year. 7 of the days are funded by the Quality Teaching Block Grant.


5.   ARTICLE V FRINGE BENEFITS

                                                                                                                       Page 19
                                                                 8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

5.1   GROUP INSURANCE
      5.1.1 Eligibility
            [a]       Employees eligible to participate in the District group insurance plans include:
                   (i)     Employees with an employment start date July 1, 2004, or later, working
                           in a position that is:
                           (1) approved for six (6) or more hours per day and approved for at
                                  least 170 days each calendar year; or
                           (2) approved for six (6) or more hours per day and approved for a total
                                  of at least 1,020 hours each calendar year.
                   (ii)    Employees with an employment start date and insurance eligibility date
                           June 30, 2004, or earlier, working in a position that is:
                           (1) approved for four (4) or more hours per day and approved for at
                                  least 170 days each calendar year; or
                           (2) approved for four (4) or more hours per day and approved for a
                                  total of at least 712 hours each calendar year.
                   (iii) Employees with an employment start date June 30, 2004, or earlier, but
                           not eligible for insurance July 1, 2004, working in a position that is:
                           (1) approved for six (6) or more hours per day and approved for at
                             least 170 days each calendar year; or
                           (2) approved for six (6) or more hours per day and approved for a total
                                  of at least 1,020 hours each calendar year.
                   (iv) Employees working in a combination of positions that are:
                           (1) approved for six (6) or more hours per day and approved for at
                                  least 170 days each calendar year; or
                           (2) approved for six (6) or more hours per day and approved for a total
                                  of at least 1,020 hours each calendar year.
            [b]    Eligible dependents include:
                   (i)     Employee's spouse, if not legally separated from employee.
                   (ii)    Employee's single children under age twenty-six (26) for whom the
                           employee has legal responsibility.
                           (1) Employees whose children are mentally disabled or have physical
                                  disabilities when insurance would end due to age, may contact the
                                  Insurance Division of the Human Resources Department to
                                  complete forms to request continuation of insurance.
                           (2) This must be done within thirty-one (31) days of the date children's
                                  insurance ends.
            [c]    Eligible part-time employees who declined coverage when first eligible, but later
                   experience a change in approved work hours to seven (7) or more per day may
                   apply to enroll within thirty (30) days of the change.
            [d]    If an employee and his/her spouse work for the District, both employees may be
                   eligible for medical and dental coverage. This coverage shall be provided
                   under the name of one spouse only rather than as coordinated coverage for
                   both. Dependent children are eligible to be covered under only one District-
                   employed parent.
            [e]    During a leave of absence, insurance coverage eligibility is lost at the end of the
                   month in which an employee:
                   (i)     not eligible for family leave (defined in section 5.16) exhausts approved
                           paid leave (or has no available paid leave for the position). If the
                           employee is insurance eligible as a result of combined positions, he/she
                           loses insurance eligibility if leave is exhausted in a position that is needed
                           to meet the insurance eligibility threshold.
                   (ii)    eligible for family leave exhausts approved paid leave and is beyond the
                           family leave period. If the employee is insurance eligible as a result of
                           combined positions, he/she loses insurance eligibility if leave is
                           exhausted in a position that is needed to meet the insurance eligibility
                           threshold and he/she is beyond the family leave period.
                   Note: Catastrophic sick leave and/or advanced paid leave approval provide
                   paid leave only and do not provide for continuation of insurance eligibility.
            [f]    To reinstate group insurance coverage lost during a leave of absence, an
                   employee must provide the District insurance office with a written request within
                   thirty (30) days of his/her return to active employment.
      5.1.2 Enrollment

                                                                                                Page 20
                                                            8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

        [a]    Insurance eligible employees are required to attend an a benefit information
               meeting with the Insurance Division of the Human Resources Department
               within thirty (30) days of their insurance eligibility date.
        [b]    Employees who are not currently insurance eligible but become so through a
               change in assignment or approved work hours must contact the Insurance
               Division within thirty (30) days of the status change and must . attend a benefit
               information meeting.
        [c]    Employees who do not apply for benefit coverage within thirty (30) days of their
               insurance eligibility date shall be subject to insurance benefit restrictions as
               outlined in the insurance contracts.
5.1.3   Effective Date
        [a]    Insurance coverage for newly hired employees shall be effective the first day of
               the month following ninety (90) calendar days after the employment start date of
               the employee.
        [b]    Insurance coverage for employees re-hired by the District into an insurance
               eligible position, or combination of positions, within twelve (12) months of
               separation from District employment shall be effective:
               (i)    the first day of the month if eligibility occurs on the first day of the month;
                      or
               (ii)   the first day of the following month if eligibility occurs on the second day
                      of the month or later.
        [c]    Insurance coverage for current employees shall be effective:
               (i)    the first day of the month if eligibility occurs on the first day of the month;
               (ii)   the first day of the following month if eligibility occurs on the second day
                      of the month or later; or
               (iii) the first day of the month following a ninety (90) calendar day waiting
                      period if the employee loses insurance eligibility during a leave of
                      absence or break in service and eligibility is not regained within twelve
                      (12) months.
        [d]    Employees must complete enrollment forms for insurance coverage in a timely
               manner. The effective dates indicated above do not apply to plans requiring
               specific underwriting.
        [e]    Whenever the District holds an insurance open enrollment, employees may opt
               to change their insurance coverage or plans.
5.1.4   Change of Status
        [a]    Employees who experience a change of status must send written notice of
               same to the District Insurance Division within thirty (30) days of the effective
               date of the change.
        [b]    Change of status includes marriage, divorce, and addition or deletion of
               children subject to insurance coverage.
5.1.5   COBRA (Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act 1986)
        The District shall comply with COBRA legislation requiring covered employers to offer
        eligible employees and their families the opportunity to apply for a temporary
        extension of health insurance coverage when coverage under the employer's plan
        would otherwise terminate.
        [a]    Eligible employees or family members have the responsibility to inform in
               writing the Insurance Division of the Human Resources Department within sixty
               (60) days of the following qualifying events for extension of coverage:
               (i)    divorce;
               (ii)   legal separation;
               (iii) death of a spouse or dependent; or
               (iv) a child losing dependent status under the provisions of the District group
                      insurance plans
        [b]    Eligible employees or insured dependents may elect to continue health
               insurance under COBRA when coverage under the District’s plan would
               otherwise terminate due to employment termination, reduction in hours, or
               unpaid leave of absence.
        [c]    Additional information regarding COBRA may be obtained from the Insurance
               Division.
        [d]    Continuation of coverage other than health insurance is available only as
               provided in specific insurance contracts.
5.1.6   Premiums

                                                                                           Page 21
                                                   8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

[a]   The District shall participate in the cost of the insurance premiums for
      employees in positions, or a combination of positions, approved for seven (7)
      or more hours per day according to the percentage contributions indicated
      below. (A pro-rated premium contribution shall be paid for eligible, enrolled
      employees in a position, or combination of positions, authorized for fewer than
      seven (7) hour-per-day and in positions working less than the full salary
      schedule contract day. Insurance premium schedules may be reviewed on the
      District web site or by contacting location insurance representatives.
[b]   Employees are financially responsible for their portion of insurance premiums.
      This amount shall be payroll deducted where possible. Part-time employees
      who are paid in ten (10) checks a years rather than twelve (12) shall have the
      annual premium deducted over nine (9) payroll checks.
[c]   If coverage eligibility is lost during the school year, insurance coverage shall
      terminate the last day of the month in which eligibility was lost. If coverage
      eligibility is lost after the end of the school year, coverage shall continue
      through August 31, for employees working on a traditional schedule and July
      31, for employees working on a year-round schedule. If coverage eligibility is
      lost, any prepaid premium amount shall be refunded. Coverage may be
      continued under COBRA provisions.
[d]   Medical Insurance Premium:
      (i)     Ninety-three percent (93%) of the employee premium and eighty-eight
              percent (88%) of the dependent premium for the plan selected. Effective
              January 1, 2006, the District premium contribution toward ValueCare
              coverage will change to match the dollar amounts contributed by the
              District toward Regence BCBS Traditional Plan coverage.
      (ii)    If an employee and his/her spouse work in insurance eligible positions for
              the District, the District shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the cost
              of the option selected for one of the employed spouses working in a
              position, or combination of positions, approved for seven (7) or more
              hours per day. This higher contribution level is in consideration of the
              fact that both individuals are insurance-eligible District employees.
              (Eligible, enrolled spouses employed in a fewer than seven (7) hour-per-
              day position, or combination of positions, shall receive an appropriate
              pro-rated premium contribution reflecting the higher contribution level.)
      [e]     Dental Insurance Premium:
              (i)     Ninety-five percent (95%) of the employee premium and fifty
                      percent (50%) of the dependent premium for a high option dental
                      plan and a matched dollar amount toward a low option dental plan.
              (ii)    If an employee and his/her spouse work for the District, the District
                      shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the premium cost for one
                      of the employed spouses working in a position, or combination of
                      positions, approved for seven (7) or more hours per day. This
                      higher contribution level is in consideration of the fact that both
                      individuals are insurance-eligible District employees. (Eligible,
                      enrolled spouses employed in a fewer than seven (7) hour-per-day
                      position, or combination of positions, shall receive an appropriate
                      pro-rated premium contribution reflecting the higher contribution
                      level.)
      [f]     Life Insurance Premium:
              The entire cost of the policy for the face benefit amount of an eligible
              employee’s annual base salary, or $18,000, whichever is greater.
      [g]     Long Term Disability Premium:
              Fifty percent (50%) of the premium.
5.1.7 Coverage
      Summary Plan Descriptions (SPD) and additional information are available from
      the Insurance Division of the Human Resources Department or the insurance
      companies. The District offers the following insurance coverage options to
      eligible employees:
      [a]     Medical;
      [b]     Dental;
      [c]     Life: Group and individual life insurance;
      [d]     Long Term Disability;

                                                                                  Page 22
                                                                  8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                        [e]    Short Term Disability
5.2   WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FOR INJURIES
      5.2.1 The Davis School District carries Workers’ Compensation insurance coverage. The
               policy allows compensation and financial aid for medical care. An employee who
               suffers any industrial accident or injury (even minor ones) shall file, within twenty-four
               (24) hours, a written report of the incident and the circumstances thereof with his/her
               principal or department head, who shall be responsible to immediately forward the
               report to the Business Administrator.
      5.2.2 Employees anticipating or experiencing an absence exceeding ten (10) consecutive
               work days shall request a leave of absence in writing from the District (sent to the
               attention of the Human Resources Department) including approximate leave dates.
               In emergency situations when extended absences cannot be anticipated or planned,
               employees shall provide written notice to the Human Resources Department as soon
               as they are physically able to do so. Upon request, employees who are absent more
               than ten (10) consecutive work days shall also provide the District Human Resources
               Department with a written statement from their physician(s) certifying illness or
               disability and projected recovery date.
      5.2.3 The District may establish temporary light duty assignments for employees released
               for light duty. It is the employee’s obligation to return to work if a light duty
               assignment is established.
      5.2.4 When employees are injured on the job, compensation for the injury shall begin on
               the fourth day of absence and continue until the employee’s return to work or benefits
               are depleted. Employees shall use their sick leave to cover the first three (3) days of
               absence. The School District shall supplement the compensation to the amount of
               total contracted salary, extending through the employees’ accumulated sick leave.
               Accumulated sick leave shall be charged at one-third day for each day in which the
               worker’s compensation benefit is supplemented by the District. Sick leave hours
               shall not be used on days that the employee would normally be off track or on non-
               contract time. In situations where employees do not have any accrued sick leave, the
               District shall not supplement workers’ compensation.
      5.2.5 The District will continue to fund the District’s share of employee benefits (life
               insurance, disability insurance, health insurance and retirement) during the District
               approved leave of absence. Employees shall continue to fund their share of the
               benefit payments in order to keep their benefits in force. It is the sole responsibility of
               employees on Worker’s Compensation to arrange with the District Payroll Department
               for this payment. Failure to do so shall result in lapse of benefits.
5.3   EDUCATOR’S SAFETY
      The District will take affirmative steps to provide a safe and secure working environment for all
      educators. In compliance with School Board policy regarding safety, safe schools, and
      emergency preparedness, each school will develop individual plans that include procedures
      for inappropriate school disruptions by students and/or adults.
5.4   EMPLOYEE ASSAULTS
      5.4.1 Written Report Within 48 Hours
               A licensed employee who is party to any alleged assault or battery committed against
               him/her in connection with his/her employment, shall file, within forty-eight (48) hours,
               a written report of the incident and the circumstances thereof with his/her principal
               who shall be responsible to immediately forward the report to the Board of Education
               through the Superintendent of Schools.
      5.4.2 Civil or Criminal Proceedings
               If civil or criminal proceedings are brought against a licensed employee alleging that
               he/she committed assault or battery in connection with his/her employment, the
               licensed employee, after filing the reports described hereafter, may request the
               cooperation of the Board of Education. Upon receiving such request, the Board of
               Education may request its attorney or insuring company to consult with the licensed
               employee's attorney or insuring company and cooperate insofar as the interests of the
               District and the licensed employee are not conflicting.
      5.4.3 Reimbursement of Expenses
               The Board of Education shall consider request for reimbursement of expenses
               incurred from:
               [a]      Personal property loss or medical or other services necessary as a result of an
                        assault upon the educator’s person, or from damage to personal property


                                                                                                 Page 23
                                                                 8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                      arising in the course of his/her employment. Only those expenses which are
                      not paid by the individual educator’s insurance, worker’s compensation or the
                      insurance provided by the Board of Education or other organized benefit
                      program will be reimbursed.
               [b]     Full Salary if Approved
                      The educator may receive full salary if approved by the Board of Education for
                      absence from employment as a result of injury sustained during an assault on
                      him/her or for a court appearance in connection with such an assault.
                      (i)    The period of payment of such salary will not exceed as a maximum the
                             time until the educator could have qualified for disability payments under
                             social security or long term disability insurance sponsored by the District.
                      (ii)   If payment of such absence is approved by the Board of Education, the
                             time shall not be charged against the educator’s sick leave or personal
                             leave days.
      5.4.4 Employee Furnish Information to District
               The licensed employee shall be responsible to report and furnish copies of any
               summons, complaint, process, information, indictment, notice or demand served
               him/her in connection with such alleged assault or battery immediately after he/she
               has been served therewith. The Board of Education will comply with any reasonable
               request by the licensed employee, his/her attorney or insuring company for any
               additional information in the Board of Education’s possession which is relevant to the
               allegations and which is not privileged by law or policy of the school District.
      5.4.5 Payment of costs for Defense
               Payment of costs for preparing and offering defense shall be referred to the insuring
               companies who shall mutually decide their proportional liability in each case. Neither
               the school District nor the District’s insuring company shall have any liability in the
               payment of fines arising out of criminal proceedings.
5.5   RETIREMENT
      The District participates in the Utah Public Employees’ Retirement System. Eligibility for
      participation and benefits are determined by Utah Retirement System guidelines. For Davis
      School District, retirement eligibility is based on individual positions, not a combination of
      positions. When an employee is eligible for participation in the system, all pay shall be
      included in the retirement system contribution calculation.
5.6   DISTRICT RETIREMENT INCENTIVES
      5.6.1 Employees who: 1) have ten (10) years of Davis District service credit, including five
               (5) years of current service in the District; and 2) meet the eligibility requirements for
               and will be receiving Utah State Retirement System Benefits within ninety (90)
               calendar days following retirement, may apply on a non-discriminatory basis for the
               voluntary retirement benefits listed in this policy. Employees with at least five (5) but
               fewer than ten (10) years of Davis District service credit and who meet the above
               criteria, may also apply for these benefits on a pro rata basis. Employees who
               currently are receiving Utah State Retirement System benefits are not eligible to apply
               for the benefits listed in this policy.
      5.6.2 Social Security Bridge Payments
               [a]    Social security bridge payments are intended to partially offset the reduction in
                      Social Security benefits due to early retirement. Eligible retirees will receive a
                      contribution of sixteen percent 16%) of their annual salary per year for three
                      (3) consecutive years into a qualified 401(a) and/or 403(b) plan, or until they
                      become eligible to receive unreduced social security benefits, whichever occurs
                      first.
               [b]    Employees who meet the criteria in 5.6.1 and who have at least twenty-five (25)
                      but fewer than thirty (30) years of salary service credit, may voluntarily
                      authorize the District to purchase additional salary service credit for them in the
                      Utah State Retirement System by applying some or all of their eligible
                      contributions on a one-time lump sum basis under the following conditions:
                      (i)    Employees eligible for three (3) years of contributions shall be credited
                             with a one-time lump sum contribution of forty-six percent ( 46%) of their
                             annual salary. The District shall apply this contribution toward the
                             purchase of additional salary service credit for the employees in the Utah
                             State Retirement System.
                      (ii)   Employees eligible for two (2) years of contributions shall be credited with
                             a one-time lump sum contribution of thirty-one percent (31%) of their

                                                                                                Page 24
                                                           8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                       annual salary, to be applied toward the District’s purchase of additional
                       salary credit.
               (iii) Employees eligible for one (1) year of contribution shall be credited with a
                       one-time lump sum contribution of sixteen percent (16%) of their annual
                       salary, to be applied toward the District’s purchase of additional salary
                       service credit.
               (iv) The District shall not purchase additional salary service credit that, when
                       combined with an employee’s current years of salary service credit,
                       would exceed thirty (30) years of total salary service credit.
               (v)     Eligible employees shall notify the Payroll Department in writing of their
                       request to receive a one-time lump sum contribution no later than the
                       early retirement notification deadlines stipulated in section 5.6.6.
5.6.3   Sick Leave Conversion
        [a]    Employees qualifying for regular state retirement benefits may elect to receive
               one (1) of the following:
               (i)     An amount paid as a lump sum employer contribution to the employee’s
                       401(a) and/or 403(b) account equal to twenty-one and a half percent
                       (21.5%) of the value of the employee’s accumulated sick leave; or
               (ii)    A credit of twenty-one and a half percent (21.5%) of the same sick leave
                       value to be applied toward the payment of health insurance premiums
                       during retirement.
        [b]    Employees who meet the criteria in section 5.6.1 and who have at least twenty-
               five (25) but fewer than thirty (30) years of salary service credit, may voluntarily
               authorize the District to apply some or all of the sick leave payment in section
               5.6.3 above toward the District’s purchase of additional salary service credit for
               the employees in the Utah State Retirement System. The District shall not
               purchase additional salary service credit that, when combined with an
               employee’s current years of salary service credit, would exceed thirty (30) years
               of total salary service credit. Eligible employees shall notify the Payroll
               Department in writing of such request no later than the early retirement
               notification deadlines stipulated in section 5.6.6.)
        [c]    If the retiree dies, the amount remaining to be paid under section 5.6.2 shall be
               paid to the retiree’s designated beneficiary.
5.6.4   Post Retirement Health and Dental Insurance
        Employees who retire under the incentive program will continue to be enrolled in
        group medical and dental programs until they become eligible for medicare, or for the
        ten (10) consecutive years following retirement, whichever occurs first. This
        enrollment is contingent upon the retirees contributing the same premium as required
        of active employees for the first three years and the full premium, as determined by
        the District Insurance Committee, for the following seven (7) years. Retirees electing
        the out-of-area plan pay thirty percent (30%) of the premium for the first three (3)
        years and the full premium, as determined by the District Insurance Committee, for
        the following seven (7) years.
5.6.5   The following employees are not eligible for participation in the retirement incentive
        program:
        [a]    Any employee who has received a written notice of termination.
        [b]    Any employee who is retiring under the disability provisions of the Utah State
               Retirement Act.
        [c]    Any employee who previously has received retirement incentive benefits from
               the District.
5.6.6   In order to apply for retirement incentives, an employee must notify the Human
        Resources Department in writing and must submit a completed “Application for
        Retirement Agreement and Waiver” form to the Payroll Department no later than
        December 1, for a retirement date at the end of the second term; or March 1, for a
        retirement date at the end of the regular school year. Employees who have submitted
        their application will have no more that twenty (20) calendar days from the date of
        submission in which to rescind their decision. Unless the decision is rescinded in a
        timely manner, the retirement shall be considered final. However, nothing shall
        prevent the District from granting a request to rescind made after the twenty (20) day
        deadline. All requests to rescind retirement application must be submitted in writing
        by the employee to the Human Resources Department.
5.6.7   No verbal communications or letters of intent will be accepted as application for

                                                                                          Page 25
                                                                 8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

              participation in the retirement incentive program. Without appropriate completion of
              the "Application for Retirement" form and signed waiver, no employee shall qualify for
              nor receive any of the benefits provided through the program.
     5.6.8 Benefits of this early retirement incentive program provided by the District are
              independent of the Utah State Retirement System.
     5.6.9 Benefits of this retirement incentive program are not intended to be combined or
              coordinated with the early retirement provisions outlined in Utah Code Ann. § 67-19-
              14.
     5.6.10 For purposes of determining the retirement incentive contribution, the number of
              years before the retiree becomes eligible to receive unreduced social security benefits
              as of the official last day of work shall be used. Annual leave days for which an
              employee receives pay following the last day worked shall not be considered in
              determining retirement benefits.
     5.6.11 Re-employed District Retirees
              District retirees receiving the incentives provided in this section shall be subject to the
              following benefits and conditions if they are rehired by the District.
              [a]    Social security bridge payments shall continue as outlined in section 5.6.2.
              [b]    Upon re-employment in an insurance eligible position, insurance benefits,
                     including premium payments, shall be administered in the same manner as for
                     other active employees.
              [c]    Upon re-employment, any unused balance of sick leave credit applied toward
                     the payment of health insurance premiums during retirement under section
                     5.6.3[a](ii) shall be contributed to a qualified 401 (a) or 403 (b) plan for the
                     employee.
              [d]    Eligible re-employed retirees may utilize any unused participation time on the
                     Davis School District Early Retirement Incentive Medical and Dental Plan (ERP)
                     when they terminate District employment. This participation time includes the
                     balance of the unused insurance benefit extension (to a maximum total of ten
                     years) or until medicare eligible, whichever occurs first. The Early Retirement
                     Incentive Medical and Dental Plan, available for review in the Human
                     Resources Department, includes the specific provisions governing retiree
                     insurance benefits.
     5.6.12 If the District is required to revise educator retirement incentives during the contract
              year due to legislation, case law or litigation, the revisions shall be developed through
              the contract negotiation teams.
5.7 DISTRICT EXTRA CURRICULAR PASSES
     5.7.1 Charge a $30 fee for the yearly non-transferable pass.
     5.7.2 All educators of the Davis School District can purchase this pass.
     5.7.3 The pass will allow the holder plus one to any authorized school activity without
              charge.
     5.7.4 The fees collected will be divided equally among participating high schools.
     5.7.5 The pass may be purchased through the District office.
5.8 FRINGE BENEFITS
     No fringe benefit received or available under Section 5 is or shall be considered as "pay" or
     "salary."
5.9 PAYROLL PROCEDURES
     5.9.1 Payroll is made through direct deposit. The payroll period is from the first day of the
              month to and including the last day of the month. Payroll direct deposit shall be
              made on the first day of the month unless the first day of the month is a weekend or
              District holiday. In that case, payroll direct deposit shall be made on the last banking
              day of the preceding month. The only exception to this is the January 1 deposit,
              which shall be made the first working day of January. The monthly leave reporting
              period ends the 20th of the month or three (3) working days prior to the date payroll
              direct deposits are made, whichever occurs first.
     5.9.2 When employees resign or otherwise terminate their District employment, the
              effective date of their termination shall be the last date actually worked unless the
              termination occurs during or at the conclusion of a District-approved leave of
              absence.
5.10 ANNUITY PROGRAM
     5.10.1 Full-time and part-time employees of the District may make payroll deductions to
              District approved tax-deferred annuity programs.


                                                                                                Page 26
                                                                 8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

              [a]  The District shall not be responsible for the operation, performance, or
                   investment results of any annuity or deferred compensation program.
            [b]    Information pertaining to annuity options is available at the Payroll Department.
     5.10.2 An employee may participate in this program at any time between September 1st and
            May 1st of the school year. Any amount within the law of multiples of $5 or $10 may
            be deducted.
5.11 LEAVES OF ABSENCE AND RELEASED TIME
     5.11.1 General Provisions
            [a]    Employees anticipating or experiencing an absence exceeding ten (10)
                   consecutive work days shall request a leave of absence in writing (sent to the
                   Human Resources Department) including purpose for the request and
                   approximate leave dates.
            [b]    All applicable paid leave available to an employee shall be used prior to unpaid
                   leave usage (with the exception of sick leave used for adoption purposes).
            [c]    Leave can be used only in the position in which it is earned unless that position
            is no longer held by the employee, in that case, an employee has the option of being
            paid for unused personal leave or maintaining the leave to be used in his/her current
            positions(s).
            [d]    Insurance coverage eligibility is lost at the end of the month in which an
                   employee:
                   (i)    not eligible for family leave (defined in section 5.15) exhausts approved
                          paid leave (or has no available paid leave for the position). If the
                          employee is insurance eligible as a result of combined positions, he/she
                          loses insurance eligibility if leave is exhausted in a position that is needed
                          to meet the insurance eligibility threshold.
                   (ii)   eligible for family leave exhausts approved paid leave and is beyond the
                          family leave period. If the employee is insurance eligible as a result of
                          combined positions, he/she loses insurance eligibility if leave is
                          exhausted in a position that is needed to meet the insurance eligibility
                          threshold and he/she is beyond the family leave period.
                   An employee may continue health insurance coverage by electing COBRA
                   (section 5.1.5 ). Other insurance coverage may be continued only as provided
                   in the specific insurance contracts.
                   Note: Catastrophic sick leave and/or advanced paid leave approval provide
                   paid leave only and do not provide for continuation of insurance eligibility.
     5.11.2 Unpaid Leave of Absence for Graduate Study (Not Sabbatical)
            [a]    Professional personnel who have three (3) years of teaching will be granted a
                   leave of absence when approved by the Davis Board of Education for the
                   purpose of graduate study.
            [b]    Applications for leave must be submitted in writing to the Superintendent of
                   Schools on or before June 1 prior to the year for which leave is desired.
            [c]    Job placement upon return to the Davis School District will be dependent upon
                   available openings. In the event it is not practicable for the District to assign the
                   teacher to the same school or teaching area where he/she previously served,
                   reasonable efforts will be made to place the teacher in an area or position in
                   which the teacher is best qualified.
            [d]    Recipients of a leave of absence have the responsibility to notify the
                   Superintendent of Schools on or before March 1 of the year in which they are
                   on leave, concerning their employment intentions for the coming year.
            [e]    One additional step on the salary schedule will be granted in recognition of the
                   graduate study completed.
     5.11.3 Unpaid Academic Year Leaves of Absence
            Leaves of absence may be granted for one academic year when approved by the
            Superintendent according to the following:
            [a]    Applications for leave must be submitted in writing to the Superintendent by the
                   teacher before March 1 of the preceding year, except in circumstances
                   involving health related emergencies.
            [b]    The District shall consider leave of absence requests for the following
                   purposes:
                   (i)    Work or educational experiences related to the teacher’s educational
                          assignment.
                   (ii)   Travel-study programs for full academic year for credit.

                                                                                               Page 27
                                                           8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

               (iii)Civil or political activities requiring temporary full-time involvement for one
                    academic year.
             (iv) Teacher exchange programs.
             (v)    Applications for leaves for work experience, programs of travel-study or
                    teacher exchange shall be considered on the basis of potential value to
                    the teacher and School District in their educational assignment and
                    applications should describe the specific benefits which are anticipated.
                    Upon return to the District the individual shall verify completion of the
                    program for which the leave was granted.
             (vi) Health related problems, verified by a doctor, that prevent the educator
                    from performing work duties during the academic year.
             (vii) Military service, extended humanitarian or religious service, or other
                    similar service that may enhance the educator’s teaching skills or
                    experience.
       [c]   A teacher may request a one year extension of an unpaid leave of absence
             provided that such request shall be submitted on or before March 1 prior to the
             expiration of the original leave.
       [d]   Personnel returning to the District from unpaid leave, approved by the
             Superintendent, will be given consideration for an assignment within their area
             of qualification. In the event it is not practicable for the District to assign the
             teacher to the same school or teaching area where he/she previously served,
             reasonable efforts will be made to place the teacher in an area or position in
             which the teacher is qualified.
       [e]   Premiums on group insurance coverage will not be paid by the District for
             teachers on unpaid leaves. However, the teacher may retain the group
             insurance coverage during the unpaid leave period by applying for COBRA
             benefits (see section 5.1.5).
       [f]   A teacher returning to the District from unpaid leave shall retain the same sick
             leave benefits as he/she accrued at the time of entering upon such leave.
       [g]   The provisions of paragraphs 5.11.3[e] and [f] apply to teachers on unpaid
             leaves covered in 5.11.3[b](i) and (ii).
5.11.4 Unpaid Leaves of Absence for Less Than One Year
       Unpaid leaves of absence for fewer than ten (10) work days may be approved upon
       request by the principal or program supervisor. Unpaid leaves of absence for ten (10)
       or more work days, but for less than a full year, may be granted when approved by
       the Superintendent according to the following:
       [a]   Applications for leave must be submitted in writing to the Superintendent by the
             teacher at least sixty (60) days prior to the requested leave date, except in
             circumstances involving health related emergencies or unforeseen events.
       [b]   The District shall consider leave of absence requests for less than one year for
             the following purposes:
             (i)    Work or educational experience directly related to the teacher’s
                    educational assignment.
             (ii)   Travel-study programs for academic credit.
             (iii) Civil or political activities requiring temporary full-time involvement.
             (iv) Teacher exchange purposes.
             (v)    Leaves of absence shall not be granted for purposes relating primarily to
                    vacation. Applications for leaves for work experience, programs of travel-
                    study or teacher exchange shall be considered on the basis of potential
                    value to the teacher and school District in their educational assignment
                    and applications should describe the specific benefits which are
                    anticipated. Upon return to the District the individual shall verify
                    completion of the program for which the leave was granted.
             (vi) Health related problems, verified by a doctor, that prevent the educator
                    from performing work duties.
             (vii) Military service, extended humanitarian or religious service, or other
                    similar service that may enhance the educator’s teaching skills or
                    experience.
       [c]   The District will make a reasonable effort to place teachers returning from such
             leave in the same position they held prior to going on leave. However, the
             District will not guarantee such placement. In situations where teachers may
             not be returned to their same positions, their principal shall so notify them in

                                                                                          Page 28
                                                        8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

            advance of their leave.
        [d] Premiums on group insurance coverage will not be paid by the District for
            teachers on unpaid leave beyond the month in which the leave commences.
            However, the teacher may retain the group insurance coverage during the
            unpaid leave period by applying for COBRA benefits (See section 5.1.5).
       [e]  A teacher returning to the District from unpaid leave shall retain the same sick
            leave benefits as he/she accrued at the time of entering upon such leave.
       [f]  Teachers receiving a leave under the provisions of this policy shall not be
            eligible to receive another such leave within three (3) calendar years of the
            date their original leave begins.
5.11.5 Educational Reimbursement
       [a]  Purpose: To provide financial help to selected, full-time, non-provisional
            educators for additional education and training. The Board of Education
            recognizes the mutual benefit derived for educators and the District when
            educators participate in educational activities which:
            (i)    improve professional performance and classroom instruction;
            (ii)   encourage independent research and achievement;
            (iii) encourage commitment to their educational assignment; and
            (iv) prepare them for positions in which they may make even greater
                   contributions toward the achievement of District goals and for District
                   identified areas of personnel development. This may include, but is not
                   limited to, specific areas of certification.
       [b]  Program Description
            Educational Reimbursement is available to selected educators. Educators may
            apply for financial help through the Education Reimbursement Committee for
            reimbursements for classes, programs, and other activities taken outside the
            educator’s regular working hours.
       [c]  Education Reimbursement Committee
            The Educational Reimbursement Committee shall be comprised of twelve (12)
            licensed staff members selected in accordance with the “District Committees”
            policy contained in this Agreement.
            (i)    The Superintendent, after consulting with the President of the
                   Association, shall select a chairperson for the committee.
            (ii)   Committee members shall be appointed for staggered terms of three (3)
                   years with terms ending on June 30th.
            (iii) Committee members unable to complete their full term will be replaced.
       [d]  Education Reimbursement
            Full or part-time educators with three (3) or more years of current service in the
            District may apply for reimbursement of expenses incurred in completing
            classes, seminars, workshops, and other professional improvement programs.
            Reimbursement to an individual educator shall not exceed one thousand dollars
            in any twelve (12) consecutive month period, and will be pro-rated for part-time
            employees. Costs eligible for reimbursement shall be limited to required
            registrations, tuition, fees, and books.
            (i)    The application deadline shall be April 1, for courses to be taken during
                   the subsequent summer and fall, and November 1, for courses to be
                   taken during the subsequent winter and spring.
            (ii)   The application shall be submitted on a District form and include:
                   (1) a description of the relevance of the activity to the educator’s
                          assignment, the goals of the school, and the goals of the District;
                   (2) the dates of educational activities;
                   (3) the sponsoring university, college, or agency;
                   (4) credit to be awarded;
                   (5) costs to be reimbursed; and
                   (6) other applicable data.
            (iii) Applications must be granted preliminary approval by the Committee
                   before the activity is undertaken.
            (iv) Following completion of coursework, reimbursement must be requested
                   by February 1, for summer and fall courses approved for reimbursement,
                   and by June 1, for winter and spring courses approved for
                   reimbursement, and will be held subject to verification of activity
                   completion, costs, grades, and other applicable data.

                                                                                     Page 29
                                                                 8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                     (v)   The Committee shall recommend applicants to the Superintendent.
                     (vi)  The Superintendent shall consider the Committee’s recommendations
                           and make the awards.
            [e]    District Not Obligated to Reward Educator
                   Participation in the Educational Reimbursement program does not obligate the
                   District to reward the Educator through promotion, transfer, or reassignment.
5.12 SICK LEAVE POLICY
     5.12.1 Illness and Personal Bereavement
            The Sick Leave Policy provides full pay in cases of illness and personal bereavement.
            [a]    Seven (7)days per year will be allowed for the first three (3) years of
                   employment.
            [b]    Ten (10) days per year will be allowed for succeeding years.
            [c]    Unused sick leave days will accumulate.
            [d]    The totals shall be interpreted to be effective as of July 1 each year.
            [e]    The sick leave policy is designed to assist persons who have to remain away
                   from work because of illness, disability, or other reasons specifically identified in
                   this policy.
            [f]    Employees are expected to return to work as soon as they have recovered from
                   their illness, injury, surgery, delivery, or other disabling condition.
            [g]    The Board of Education reserves the right to require written verification of
                   illness or disability by the employee’s physician or by a physician appointed by
                   the Board.
     5.12.2 Death or Serious Illness of Family Member
            The policy is designed by the Board of Education to be used judiciously for illness of
            self and in the event of the death or serious illness of an immediate member of the
            family, according to the following provisions:
            [a]    The phrase, “an immediate member of the family,” includes husband, wife, son,
                   daughter, father, mother, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother, sister,
                   grandmother and grandfather. (Exceptions that may be considered by the
                   Superintendent: sister-in-law, brother-in-law, uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, first
                   cousin and those who have virtually held the position of an immediate member
                   of the family.)
            [b]    For any absence beyond one day in case of serious illness of an immediate
                   family member other than spouse, parent, or child, approval must be secured
                   from the Superintendent. For any absence beyond one day in case of serious
                   illness of a spouse, parent, or child, the Family Leave Policy 5.14 shall apply.
            [c]    With the approval of the principal or program director, any educator under
                   contract with the Board of Education will be entitled to a leave of absence for up
                   to five (5) days in the event of death in the immediate family. Principals shall
                   have discretion in approving leave requests based on the particular needs and
                   circumstances surrounding the death. The days will be charged to “Sick
                   Leave.” Additional sick leave may be allowed for this purpose subject to the
                   approval of the Superintendent.
            [d]    Any absence not in the above mentioned category and any absence not
                   covered under the Family Leave Policy shall be deducted at the rate of 1/200 of
                   the yearly salary for each day except in the case of employees whose yearly
                   salaries are based on more than the regular teacher’s contract period.
            [e]    Monthly statements of accumulated sick leave may be verified by inspection of
                   the individual school payroll report and/or the records of the District accounting
                   office.
            [f]    Employees anticipating an absence exceeding ten (10) consecutive work days
                   shall provide advance notice in writing to the District personnel office of their
                   approximate leave dates so that necessary payroll adjustments and long-term
                   substitute arrangements can be made.
                   (i)     In emergency situations when extended absences cannot be anticipated
                           or planned, employees shall provide written notice to the personnel office
                           as soon as they are physically able to do so.
                   (ii)    Upon request, employees who use more than ten (10) consecutive sick
                           leave days shall also provide the District personnel office with a written
                           statement from their physician(s) certifying illness or disability and
                           projected recovery date.
            [g]    Employees who exhaust their accumulated sick leave may request an advance

                                                                                               Page 30
                                                               8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                   of sick leave credit, but not to exceed five (5) days.
                   (i)    If such credit is granted, the requesting employee must pay back the
                          number of days during the following two (2) years by deducting days from
                          unused accumulated sick leave.
                   (ii)   For employees who use sick leave credit and who cease employment,
                          sick leave credit must be returned in cash and may be withheld from the
                          employee’s final paycheck.
            [h]    Licensed personnel who incur an extended illness which makes it impossible
                   for them to fulfill their professional duties, may upon request be granted by the
                   Board of Education, relief from their current year contract without penalty and
                   without prejudice to contract renewal rights for the succeeding contract year.
     5.12.3 Adoption Leave
            Employees who are adopting a child are entitled to use up to twenty (20) days of their
            accumulated sick leave. If there is a need beyond these days, employees may
            request in writing to the Superintendent the use of additional accumulated sick leave
            or a temporary leave without pay according to the provisions in the Family Leave
            Policy section 5.16. Employees who have accrued more than twenty (20) days of sick
            leave may request in writing to the Superintendent permission to use up to one-half of
            their accrued sick leave beyond twenty (20) days during their family leave. However,
            any family leave granted for adoption purposes, whether paid or unpaid, shall not
            exceed the twelve (12) calendar week limit provided in the Family Leave Policy.
     5.12.4 Personnel who are employed beyond the basic nine (9) month contract period and
            who qualify for sick leave shall be entitled to one additional day of sick leave for each
            additional month worked inclusive of vacation days.
            [a]    Only extended contacts with continuous service within any given month which
                   can be evaluated to equal one-half month or more of a regular school year
                   service shall apply. In no case would this include evening classes, hourly rate
                   employees, workshops or in-service programs.
            [b]    Such evaluation shall be at the discretion of the Superintendent of Schools.
     5.12.5 Personnel who use their sick leave completely for other than illness and bereavement
            over a period of two (2) consecutive years shall have their annual sick leave reduced
            to four (4) days per year until they have accumulated a sum equal to the total number
            of days used during the two-year period.
     5.12.6 Upon retirement eligible employees may elect to convert accumulated sick leave as
            specified in the Retirement Incentives provision (section 5.5). In the event of the
            death of an employee eligible for the Retirement Incentives, the employee’s
            designated beneficiary shall be paid a sum equal to twenty-one and one-half percent
            (21.5%) of the value of the employee’s accumulated sick leave based upon the
            employee’s position on the salary schedule.
5.13 TEMPORARY DISABILITY NOT COVERED BY SICK LEAVE
     5.13.1 Employees anticipating a temporary disability extending beyond accumulated sick
            leave days shall be entitled to request a temporary disability leave not to exceed
            twenty-one (21) calendar days beyond the use of accumulated sick leave and
            advanced sick leave credit, if applicable. Such temporary disability leave is leave
            without pay and is not available until sick leave is exhausted.
     5.13.2 Employees under temporary disability are expected to return to work as soon as they
            have recovered from their illness, injury, surgery, delivery, or other disabling
            condition, subject to the provisions of section 5.12.2[h].
     5.13.3 The employee shall notify the Superintendent in writing of a desire to take such
            temporary disability leave at least thirty (30) days prior to the date on which the leave
            is to begin, except in case of emergency. If required by the District, the employee
            shall provide a physician’s statement certifying temporary disability. Such temporary
            disability leave shall be granted or denied in the discretion of the Superintendent or
            his/her designee.
     5.13.4 Granting of such temporary disability leave shall be without prejudice to reassignment
            to the same position which was held at the time the leave commenced or to a
            substantially equivalent position, i.e., a position of like status, seniority and pay,
            provided that at the time of taking such leave the employee specifies a time of return
            to employment which return shall be within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the
            granting of such leave. The employee shall return to work upon expiration of said
            leave.
     5.13.5 Employees not returning to their assigned position after exhausting all earned or

                                                                                            Page 31
                                                                8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

              advance sick leave and temporary disability leave shall be terminated from
              employment, subject to the provisions of paragraph 5.12.2[h].
     5.13.6 The District may require an employee to submit to an examination by a medical
              doctor selected by the District to justify granting or continuing temporary disability
              leave.
     5.13.7 Temporary disability leave shall be granted and continued only for medical reasons
              which temporarily disable an employee from substantially performing his or her
              employment assignment.
5.14 CATASTROPHIC SICK LEAVE BANK
     5.14.1 The District will establish and manage a catastrophic sick leave bank from which
              eligible educators may draw leave under the conditions and restrictions outlined
              below. Teachers who wish to participate in the catastrophic sick leave bank program
              shall be required to contribute one (1) day of their available sick leave to the bank.
              This contribution must be made each year during the insurance open enrollment
              period, as designated by the District, by completing and submitting the appropriate
              form to the Human Resources Department. If the bank has a substantial balance of
              days remaining at the end of the academic year, the Association and District may
              agree to suspend the contribution requirement for one year. Any educator who did
              not previously participate in the bank but who desires to participate during the non-
              contribution year will be required to donate one (1) day to initiate eligibility by
              submitting the appropriate form to the Human Resources Department during the
              insurance open enrollment period, as designated by the District.
     5.14.2 Only educators who have contributed to the bank and who have depleted their sick
              leave and personal leave balances shall be eligible to receive consideration for sick
              leave from the bank.
     5.14.3 All requests for sick leave from the bank must be in writing and must be addressed to
              the Human Resources Director. Requests may be submitted and approved anytime
              after the required sick leave has been contributed. The requests must include the
              reasons for the request, written verification from the attending physician indicating the
              nature and severity of the illness or health problem along with the projected recovery
              date, and the number of sick leave days requested.
     5.14.4 Only severe, extended illness and catastrophic medical problems of an employee or
              immediate family member will be considered for leave withdrawals from the bank.
              Illness or medical problems of a short-term nature shall not be considered. Life-
              threatening illness or severe accidents requiring extended recovery periods will be
              given first priority.
     5.14.5 Withdrawals from the bank for illness of the participating employee shall not exceed
              one-hundred (100) leave days per employee during any consecutive twelve (12)
              month period. In addition, bank withdrawals for illness of the participating employee
              shall not exceed one-hundred (100) days cumulatively for the same illness, medical
              condition or recovery.
     5.14.6 Withdrawals from the bank for illness of an immediate family member shall not
              exceed twenty (20) days during any consecutive twelve (12) month period. In
              addition, bank withdrawals for an illness of an immediate family member shall not
              exceed twenty (20) days cumulatively for the same illness, medical condition, or
              recovery. For requests under this policy, immediate family members shall include
              husband, wife, son, daughter, father, mother, brother, sister, grandmother, and
              grandfather. In addition, exceptions may be considered by the Superintendent for
              other relatives or those who have virtually held the position of an immediate member
              of the family.
     5.14.7 In all sick leave bank withdrawal requests, whether for the participating employee or
              for an immediate family member, the District reserves the right to approve requests,
              deny requests, or to approve only a portion of the leave days requested.
5.15 EMERGENCY LEAVE
     In the event of a personal or family crisis or other emergency situation which is not covered by
     the catastrophic sick leave bank, short-term disability, long-term disability or workers’
     compensation, employees who need to be away from work for a limited period of time may
     request emergency leave in writing from the Superintendent. Such leave will be available only
     to an employee in good standing who has used all accrued sick and personal leave. When an
     employee is granted this leave, the cost of a licensed substitute shall be deducted from the
     employee’s daily rate of pay for each day of approved absence. Requests for emergency
     leave shall be limited to twenty (20) days per contract year, but the decision as to the amount

                                                                                              Page 32
                                                                 8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

     of leave allowed in each individual case will be determined solely by the District.
5.16 FAMILY LEAVE
     5.16.1 In the event of serious illness of an eligible employee or an eligible employee’s
              spouse, parent, or child, an employee may request in writing to the Superintendent a
              leave of absence of up to twelve (12) calendar weeks. An eligible employee may also
              request a leave of absence of up to twelve (12) calendar weeks following the birth or
              adoption of the employee’s child.
     5.16.2 In the event of a “qualifying exigency” arising out of a military service member’s
              current tour of active duty or because the service member is notified of an impending
              call to active duty in support of a contingency operation, an employee who is the
              spouse, parent, or child of the service member may request in writing to the
              Superintendent a leave of absence of up to twelve (12) calendar weeks.
     5.16.3 In the event a recovering member of the Armed Forces (who sustained an injury or
              illness in the line of duty on active duty) requires the care of an employee that is the
              spouse, parent, child or nearest blood relative of the service member, the employee
              may request in writing to the Superintendent a leave of absence of up to twenty-six
              (26) calendar weeks.
     5.16.4 Employees who have worked for the District for at least twelve (12) months and who
              have regularly worked a minimum of twenty (20) hours per week for the District during
              the previous twelve (12) month period are eligible for family leave.
     5.16.5 Eligible employees may not be granted family leave in excess of twelve (12) calendar
              weeks during any twelve (12) month period (with the exception of family leave granted
              on behalf of a care giver for an injured military service member).
     5.16.6 Written requests for family leave due to serious illness or health condition must be
              accompanied by a doctor’s certification indicating the anticipated duration and the
              nature of the illness or health condition. The illness or condition must require
              inpatient care in a hospital or residential facility or continuing treatment by a health
              care provider. At its expense, the District may require the employee to obtain a
              second opinion by a doctor designated by the District.
     5.16.8 In the event of birth or adoption, the District may require the employee to use his/her
              applicable accumulated personal leave prior to granting unpaid leave. For an
              employee’s own illness or illness of a spouse, parent, or child, the District may require
              the employee to use his/her applicable accumulated personal leave and sick leave
              before granting unpaid leave. The total family leave period, whether paid or unpaid,
              shall not exceed twelve (12) calendar weeks.
     5.16.9 When an employee and spouse both are employed by the District, both individuals
              together shall be limited to a total of twelve (12) calendar weeks of leave in the event
              of birth or adoption of a child or the illness of a parent.
     5.16.10 Employees anticipating a family leave request shall give the District as much advance
              written notice as possible.
     5.16.11 During the family leave period and/or a paid sick leave, the District shall continue to
              pay its portion of the employee’s group health insurance premium. An employee on
              family leave must continue to pay his/her portion of the insurance premium in order to
              keep coverage in effect. If the employee fails to return to work with the District for at
              least thirty (30) calendar days following the leave, for reasons other than the
              continuation or onset of a serious health condition or other circumstances beyond
              his/her control, the District shall be entitled to reimbursement for its portion of the
              insurance premium costs. The employee shall not be required to reimburse the
              District for the District portion of the insurance premium costs if the employee is on
              the leave at the end of the school year and resigns employment at the end of the
              school year or during the summer break.
     5.16.12 Upon returning from family leave, an employee shall be assigned to his/her previous
              position(s) or to equivalent position(s) with equivalent pay and benefits.
5.17 PERSONAL LEAVE
     Effective July 1 each year, educators shall be credited two (2) days of personal leave to be
     used for their personal business. Teachers with fifteen (15) or more years of teaching
     experience, as determined by the salary schedule, will be entitled to one (1) additional day.
     Any teacher with an all track contract at a year-round school will be entitled to one (1)
     additional day of personal leave each year. Personal leave may also be earned when
     teachers within a school fill in for absent teachers when the automated sub-finder system is
     not successful in filling an absence, or when prior principal approval is obtained (this will apply
     to teachers in secondary schools who substitute during their prep period or teachers in year-

                                                                                               Page 33
                                                                8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

     round elementary schools who substitute when they are off track). Personal leave
     accumulation, use and carry-over are based on a single position, not a combination of
     positions. A personal leave day may be used for any purpose at the discretion of the teacher,
     subject to the following conditions:
     5.17.1 A teacher planning to use a personal leave day or days shall notify his/her principal at
               least one day in advance, except in cases of emergency.
     5.17.2 The teacher may be asked to explain the reason for any personal leave requested for
               a school day immediately before or after a holiday, weekend or vacation period and
               reasonable restrictions and limitations will be imposed on personal leaves on such
               days.
               [a]    Only in the event of an emergency will teachers be permitted to take personal
                      leave on regularly scheduled parent/teacher conference days and the first day
                      and last two (2) days of the school year.
               [b]    In addition, to assure the normal operation of a school, limitations must be
                      placed on the number of teachers in a school who can take personal leave on
                      any given day. This will be determined by the principal of each school.
     5.17.3 Effective July 1, 2009, teachers not using a personal leave day or days during the
               school year may accumulate and carry forward a maximum of thirty (30) days of
               unused leave to the following year.
               [a]    Educators are encouraged to use all earned personal leave each year;
                      however, a maximum of ten (10) days may be used in a contract year.
                      When family or personal events arise which cannot be rescheduled to non-
                      contract time, educators may make a request to the principal or program
                      director to use additional days of personal leave during a contract year.
               [b]    When an employee’s balance of personal leave exceeds thirty (30) days on the
                      last day of the monthly payroll absence reporting period in October, or the
                      contract of a licensed employee is terminated, unused personal leave shall be
                      compensated at the licensed substitute rate.
               [c]    For those teachers who do not complete a full contract year, personal leave
                      days shall be pro-rated.
     5.17.4 When family or personal events arise which cannot be rescheduled to non-contract
               time, educators with need of additional personal leave may make a request to the
               principal or program director for an advance of up to five (5) additional days of
               personal leave. Educators granted an advance under this provision will have the
               option to repay the advance using accumulated sick leave at the rate of one and one-
               half (1.5) days of sick leave for every one (1) day of personal leave advanced.
               Educators exercising this option shall notify the payroll department in writing at the
               time the advance is granted.
     5.17.5 With prior approval of the principal, a teacher who uses personal leave for
               professional purposes will be compensated at the personal leave rate.
5.18 SERVICE IN LEGISLATURE
     The Board of Education grants release of personnel to participate in the legislature who have
     been elected to serve either in the Senate or House of Representatives. During such
     legislative service the employee shall receive his/her regular salary less his/her legislative
     salary. These arrangements shall be made through the District’s Payroll Department.
5.19 CIVIC DUTY
     5.19.1 Jury Duty
               Employees selected for jury duty shall receive full salary, less the amount they
               receive as a juror.
     5.19.2 Witness in Court
               [a]    Employees who are subpoenaed to testify as a witness in legal action shall
                      receive full salary for the period they are absent from duty while in court.
               [b]    Employees who are litigants in legal action in cases where the legal action is an
                      outgrowth of or related to their educational assignment shall receive full salary
                      for the period they are absent from duty while in court.
     5.19.3 Funerals and Civic Programs
               Personnel employed on a full-time basis will be allowed time for attendance at
               funerals and special civic programs as a speaker, chairperson, musician, etc.,
               provided arrangements are made in advance and the principal gives approval. If the
               funeral is for the death of an immediate member of the family, the absence shall be
               covered under sick leave as provided in Section 5.10.1.


                                                                                              Page 34
                                                                      8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

     5.20 MILITARY LEAVE
          5.20.1 Licensed employees who are members of the United States Army, Navy, Air Force or
                  Marine Reserve shall be allowed military leave of absence not to exceed fifteen (15)
                  working days per year to attend mandatory annual encampment or training in
                  connection with the Reserve training requirements.
          5.20.2 During such military leave the employee shall receive his/her regular pay less his/her
                  military base pay.
          5.20.3 Such leave of absence will be granted only on the basis of official military orders
                  which must be filed with his/her immediate supervisor.
          5.20.4 Such leave should, if possible, be taken during the employee’s vacation or at a time
                  which presents a minimum of disruption and interference to the District’s educational
                  and other programs.
     5.21 THE ASSOCIATION PRESIDENT OF THE EXCLUSIVE BARGAINING AGENT
          5.21.1 The association president spends his/her association time in the interest of improving
                  the educational climate in the schools, the District shall release the association
                  president for the regular contract time for that individual.
          5.21.2 The Association shall reimburse the District for a portion of the Association
                  President’s compensation as agreed to by the Association and the District. The
                  portion of the President’s time paid for by the District shall be subject to the provisions
                  of Board policy as stipulated by Section 53A-3-425 of the Utah State Code.
          5.21.3 The leave shall be credited towards continuous service within the District and the
                  president shall have the right to return to the position he/she held prior to going on
                  leave.
     5.22 PROFESSIONAL LEAVE
          Professional leave will be made available for educators wishing to attend educational
          meetings, participate in workshops or visit and observe other programs during the school day.
          5.22.1 Each school will be allotted one day of leave for every four (4) full time equivalent
                  educators, except year-round schools which will be allotted one day of leave for every
                  three (3) full time equivalent educators.
          5.22.2 Educators must submit a written request for leave to their school's JSSC. The JSSC,
                  after reviewing requests, shall forward recommendations to the principal for final
                  approval.
          5.22.3 Other professional leave must be funded through a specific school budget, District
                  department budget or state or federal grant. Prior approval from the principal or
                  immediate supervisor must be obtained.
          5.22.4 Teachers wishing to attend workshops, conventions, or other educational experiences
                  on their own may, with prior approval from their principal, use their accumulated
                  personal leave for such purposes in accordance with section 5.17.5 of the Davis
                  Educators Agreement.

6.   ARTICLE VI EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES

     6.1   SELECTION OF LICENSED PERSONNEL
           6.1.1 Teachers
                 [a]  The nature of vacancies shall be determined at the school level, based on the
                      instructional needs of the school. Consideration shall be given to the totality of
                      the assignment, including the academic subject matter, grade level, and
                      extracurricular needs. The assignment of FTE positions shall be determined
                      by the principal, with input whenever possible from the JSSC and the
                      department or grade level in which the vacancy occurs. The principal shall
                      determine whether it is possible to fill the vacancy by transfer within the school
                      in accordance with section 6.5.4. If the vacancy is not filled by in-school
                      transfer, the principal shall communicate the preferred qualifications to the
                      Human Resources Department.
                 [b]  Those applying for teaching positions in Davis School District must:
                      (i)    Show evidence that they will possess a regular license applicable to the
                             position by the effective date of their assignment, or must otherwise meet
                             the legal requirement established by the State Board of Education.
                      (ii)   Be recommended by a reputable teacher-training institution or, if they
                             have prior experience, by the district or districts in which they were
                             previously employed.


                                                                                                    Page 35
                                                               8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                    (iii)  All teaching positions shall be filled with the best qualified applicants
                           according to the District teacher applicant evaluation system.
            [c]    The Human Resources Department shall have the right to place qualified
                   teachers under the following circumstances:
                   (i)     to place teachers who have been involuntarily transferred;
                   (ii)    to further District affirmative action goals; and
                   (iii) to expedite the hiring of qualified people in areas in which the applicant
                           pool is inadequate.
            [d]    When 6.1.1[c] does not apply, the Human Resources Department shall refer
                   names of qualified applicants to the school. When possible, the candidates
                   shall be interviewed by a Selection Committee consisting of the school principal
                   or his/her designee, one or more teacher representatives from the grade or
                   department(s) in which the vacancy occurs, and, where appropriate, parents.
                   The Selection Committee shall make a hiring recommendation to the principal,
                   who shall make the final decision.
            [e]    The Selection Committee shall be provided with guidelines explaining proper
                   interviewing procedures which shall be reviewed prior to interviewing any
                   candidate.
            [f]    Candidates who are interviewed by the Selection Committee shall be told the
                   date by which it is anticipated that the hiring decision will be made. Once a
                   vacancy is filled, all interviewees shall be notified in a timely manner. If the
                   hiring decision is delayed by more than two weeks, the interviewees shall by
                   notified of the delay.
      6.1.2 Highly Qualified Requirement
            Educators are expected to meet Highly Qualified requirements for the subject(s) for
            which they are assigned. However, no teacher shall be required to become Highly
            Qualified in a subject for which they are not assigned. (Also refer to section 6.5.4 for
            this agreement)
      6.1.3 Administrators
            Those applying for administrative and licensed positions in the Davis School District
            must:
            [a]    Show evidence that they will possess a regular license applicable to the
                   position by the effective date of their assignment, or must otherwise meet the
                   legal requirement established by the State Board of Education.
            [b]    Submit the application in writing.
            [c]    All administrative positions to be filled shall be announced in writing throughout
                   the District’s schools so all interested and qualified personnel may apply. The
                   announcement shall set forth the minimal qualifications which are acceptable
                   and the inclusive dates during which applications will be received.
            [d]    Applicants who are eliminated will be notified by the administration. It is
                   understood that all appointments to positions within the District are made by the
                   Board of Education on recommendation of the Superintendent of Schools.
6.2   JOB SHARING
      6.2.1 General Provision
            In situations where it is mutually advantageous to both the school District and
            teachers, a job sharing arrangement may be implemented which provides that two
            teachers may accept responsibilities for one full-time teaching assignment.
      6.2.2 Requirements
            [a]    Only two licensed employees may share one full-time position. No teacher in a
                   job share arrangement shall be assigned classroom duties comprising less than
                   one-half of a full-time equivalent position unless approved by the assistant
                   superintendent.
            [b]    At least one of the licensed employees must have had three (3) or more years
                   of successful full-time teaching experience in the Davis School District. An
                   applicant for a job sharing position who is not a current licensed employee of
                   the Davis School District will be considered only if the applicant has earned a
                   finalist rating through the District personnel department and has obtained the
                   approval of the supervising principal and the appropriate school director.
            [c]    A written plan must be presented to the principal by the licensed employee(s)
                   desiring to job share. The plan must meet the needs of the students within the
                   school’s educational program and must be approved by both the principal and
                   the school director. If two licensed employees from two different schools

                                                                                            Page 36
                                                                8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                     propose a plan to job share at one of the schools, approval must be obtained
                     from the principal of the school where the job sharing will take place and from
                     the school director.
              [d]    Time scheduling may vary as determined by the principal, with the approval of
                     the school director.
      6.2.3 Responsibilities
              Job sharing employees and all other part-time employees shall be subject to the
              same District policies, procedures, and assignments as any other licensed
              employees. They shall attend faculty meetings, parent/teacher conferences and other
              meetings required by the principal without additional compensation.
      6.2.4 Absences
              [a]    Whenever a job sharing teacher is absent from work, the school may assign a
                     substitute teacher or may allow the other job sharing teacher to substitute for
                     the absent teacher at the long term substitute rate.
              [b]    In the event that one job sharing employee terminates during the school year,
                     the other job sharing employee shall assume the full job responsibility until a
                     replacement can be hired. The District will make every reasonable effort to fill
                     the vacant position in a timely manner. When this occurs the “covering”
                     employee shall received the appropriate full-time contract pay rate during the
                     interim.
      6.2.5 Contract
              [a]    A full-time equivalent position shared by two employees shall not obligate the
                     District for greater salary and District fringe benefit costs than would be the
                     case if the position were filled by one full-time employee.
              [b]    Job sharing employees will be eligible for one standard salary step increase for
                     every contract year of service.
              [c]    All job sharing is approved for a single contract year. Each employee wishing
                     to continue a job sharing arrangement from one school year to the next must
                     submit a letter of application for re-employment as a half-time licensed
                     employee in a job sharing assignment. The letter of application must be
                     submitted to the appropriate school director before March 1 of the preceding
                     school year. No job sharing participant shall have an expectation of continued
                     employment in a job sharing assignment in a succeeding contract year.
              [d]    Licensed employees who have participated in job sharing may, at the District’s
                     discretion, be offered a full-time position in a subsequent school year. If a
                     licensed employee was employed full-time by the Davis School District prior to
                     entering into a job sharing assignment, and if that employee notifies the District
                     in writing by March 1, that person shall have the right to continued employment
                     as a full-time employee should openings become available for which he or she
                     qualifies.
              [e]    When involuntary transfers or reductions in force are deemed necessary by the
                     District administration, job sharing employees shall not be exempt. However,
                     job sharing employees identified for involuntary transfer who were not
                     employed full-time by the Davis School District prior to their job sharing
                     assignment shall only have the right to transfer to another regular half-time
                     teaching position, pending the availability of such position.
              [f]    When it becomes necessary to dissolve a job share position and reassign the
                     participating educators from one grade or subject area to another grade or
                     subject area within the school, the principal shall make the final reassignment
                     decision(s) based on the language contained in section 6.6.4 of this agreement.
6.3   MULTIPLE WORK SITE ASSIGNMENTS
      In some circumstances, the District may offer a classroom teacher an assignment which
      requires the educator to teach at more than one work site.
      Building administrators should work collaboratively with the educator assigned to multiple
      work sites to develop a reasonable schedule and expectations regarding staff meetings,
      parent teacher conferences, after school activities, and other such responsibilities.
      These responsibilities should not exceed those required of a full-time educator at a single
      work site.
6.4   PROFESSIONAL EVALUATION
      6.4.1 The Davis School District Educator Assessment System (EAS) has been developed
              collaboratively by the Davis School District and the Davis Education Association
              through the Educator Assessment System Advisory Committee. This teacher

                                                                                              Page 37
                                                                 8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

            evaluation system is outlined in the Educator Assessment System (EAS).
      6.4.2 In addition to providing for the improvement of professional competence, the
            evaluation system will:
            [a]    Identify standards and conditions of professional service in the school system.
            [b]    Provide a permanent record of the quality of each employee’s professional
                   service.
            [c]    Provide a basis for judgement with respect to the continued employment of the
                   employee.
            [d]    Provide uniform instruments on which to make evaluations.
      6.4.3 Evaluations of professional performance shall be conducted annually or more often
            on the basis of the above philosophy, criteria and procedures.
      6.4.4 Licensed personnel shall have the right to respond in writing to the evaluation and
            have that response attached to the report.
      6.4.5 When a teacher is experiencing difficulties in the performance of his/her professional
            assignment, he/she may request assistance from teaching colleagues, the school
            principal or appropriate District supervisors.
      6.4.6 A teacher who is not satisfied with an evaluation has thirty (30) days after receiving
            the written evaluation to request a review of the evaluation. The review shall be
            conducted in accordance with Utah Code Ann. §53A-10-110.
6.5   TEACHER FILES
      6.5.1 The official teacher file is the one maintained in the District office.
      6.5.2 All materials in school and District files, except confidential university placement files,
            confidential letters of reference, and applicant rating forms, shall be available to the
            teacher for inspection at his/her request.
      6.5.3 Derogatory material concerning a teacher’s conduct, service, character or personality
            shall not be placed in a teacher’s District or school file unless the teacher has had an
            opportunity to read the material. In order to acknowledge that he/she has seen and
            read such material, the teacher may be required to affix his/her signature on the
            actual copy to be filed. Such signature does not necessarily indicate agreement with
            the content of the material.
      6.5.4 Files concerning educator performance kept in the schools should be expunged of
            derogatory material that is more than two (2) years old, except as noted below. If
            such material is to be retained beyond two (2) years, it must be shown to the teacher
            involved.
            [a]    E.A.S. Working Administrator forms and supporting documents indicating an
                   educator has received a “U” must be kept in the school file for three (3) years.
      6.5.5 Any complaint about a teacher written by a parent or a student shall be brought to the
            attention of the teacher before any action is taken against the teacher.
6.6   TRANSFERS
      6.6.1 General Provisions
            The District administration may transfer educators from one school or work location to
            another.
            [a]    However, before such transfers take effect, educators shall be entitled to meet
                   with their principals or District administrators to discuss the District's reasons for
                   the transfers as well as the educators' concerns and preferences.
            [b]    Transfers shall not be imposed for the purpose of resolving performance
                   problems that should be addressed through professional assistance and
                   remediation.
            [c]    In accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, the District may transfer
                   or reassign a qualified individual with a disability to a vacant position as a
                   reasonable accommodation for the individual.
            [d]    Files concerning educator performance kept in the school and containing
                   previous E.A.S. evaluations shall be sent to the principal of the receiving
                   school. However, files should first be expunged of any derogatory material that
                   has not been shared with the educator. (note 6.5.3 and 6.5.4 above.)
      6.6.2 Voluntary Transfers
            [a]    Teachers within the District who desire a change in grades, subject or school
                   assignment may indicate such desire by completing an electronic transfer
                   request form and returning it to the Human Resources Department. Teachers
                   are strongly encouraged to submit the transfer request by March 1, and remove
                   their name from the transfer list when a transfer is no longer desired.
            [b]    Transfers are discouraged during the school year but may be considered in

                                                                                                Page 38
                                                           8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

              situations where the District administration determines that the transfers would
              be beneficial to students.
        [c]   Teachers may verify their transfer requests by confirming their placement on
              the transfer screen through the school secretary having access to the screen.
        [d]   In filling vacancies, consideration shall be given to qualified teachers voluntarily
              requesting transfers.
              (i)      All teacher openings shall be announced within the District for at least
                       five (5) calendar days prior to filling the opening, except for openings
                       occurring within forty (40) calendar days before the beginning of the
                       contract year or in situations where teachers terminate employment
                       without providing written notification thirty (30) days in advance as
                       required by the Davis Educators Agreement. If a position is not filled and
                       announced again, it may be announced for less than the initial five (5)
                       day period.
              (ii)     The principal shall interview at least two (2) qualified District transfer
                       candidates before filling a vacancy if contacted by transfer candidates
                       before the position is filled.
              (iii) After a selection decision has been made, the principal shall promptly
                       notify all transfer candidates interviewed and the Human Resources
                       Department may remove the name of successful transfer candidates from
                       the transfer list.
        [e]   In evaluating transfer candidates, principals shall give extra consideration to
              those who have served ten (10) or more years at their present school.
              Correspondingly, educators who have served ten (10) or more years at the
              same school are encouraged to consider transfer opportunities that would
              enhance professional growth and benefit students and faculties at other
              schools.
        [f]   Requests for transfer shall be considered active for the current calendar year
              only.
        [g]   A principal may recommend to a teacher that he/she should consider a transfer
              if serious public relations problems are evident.
        [h]   Nothing in this section (6.6.2) shall preclude two non-provisional educators from
              exchanging positions provided that the principals at both schools give approval.
              In such cases, an announcement will not be required in that no opening exists.
6.6.3   Involuntary Transfers
        [a]   The District administration reserves the right to transfer to another school
              educators who do not possess certifications or endorsements appropriate to the
              subject areas they are teaching.
        [b]   An ESL endorsement shall not be a factor in identifying educators for
              involuntary transfer. However, ESL endorsed educators may be identified for
              involuntary transfer when they are the teacher in the grade level or subject area
              where the position is being eliminated, with the least overall seniority in the
              District.
        [c]   Exclusive of the provisions in paragraphs [a] and [b] above, when an
              involuntary transfer is necessary to meet staffing requirements, the following
              criteria shall be applied in sequential order to determine which teacher is to be
              transferred.
              (i)      The principal shall inform educators in the grade level or subject area
                       affected that they may volunteer to take the place of the educator subject
                       to involuntary transfer as identified in (iii) below.
              (ii)     The principal shall then inform educators from the entire faculty, where
                       certification or endorsement is not an issue, that they may volunteer to
                       take the place of the educator subject to involuntary transfer.
              (iii) If there are no volunteers with appropriate licenses and endorsements,
                       the teacher in the grade level or subject area where the position is being
                       eliminated who has the least overall seniority in the District will be
                       identified as the one for transfer. However, when a school must eliminate
                       a part-time teaching position, a part-time employee shall be identified as
                       the involuntary transfer. At an elementary school, where licensure is not
                       an issue, a part-time teacher identified for involuntary transfer may
                       request to take the place of the one teacher at the school with the least
                       seniority only if that teacher is working in an equivalent part-time status.

                                                                                          Page 39
                                                    8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

              Similarly, at an elementary school, a full-time teacher designated for
              involuntary transfer mayor request to take the place of the one teacher
              (who is part of the school’s regular staffing allocation) with the least
              overall seniority in the District. If the principal approves these requests,
              the teachers who are replaced shall be designated for involuntary
              transfer.
      (iv) Exclusive of the provisions of paragraph (iii) above, teachers in job
              sharing assignments shall not be considered as individual part-time
              employees in determining their seniority and involuntary transfer status.
              Instead, in calculating the seniority of teachers in a job sharing
              assignment, seniority in the District of the job sharing partners shall be
              combined and averaged in determining seniority for the job sharing
              position.
      (iv) When more than one teacher is identified for involuntary transfer at an
              elementary school in a given school year, the principal shall follow the
              steps outlined in (i) and (iii) above. If there are insufficient volunteers with
              appropriate certifications and more than one teacher chooses to take the
              place of another educator with less District seniority, the principal shall
              meet with all those designated for involuntary transfer and identify to
              them an equal number of teachers at that school with the least overall
              seniority in the District. In consultation with the teachers designated for
              involuntary transfer, the principal shall determine which lower seniority
              teacher shall be replaced by each teacher identified for involuntary
              transfer. A teacher thus replacing another educator with less District
              seniority shall assume the same grade level assignment as the individual
              he/she is assigned to replace. The teachers who are replaced under the
              terms of this provision shall then be designated for involuntary transfer
              from the school.
      (vi) Preparation time (prep-time) teachers shall not be eligible for involuntary
              transfer. If preparation time positions are eliminated due to staffing
              reduction, the prep-time teachers shall be given transfer consideration
              only for equivalent prep-time openings at other schools.
[d]   The educator thus identified for an involuntary transfer may remain at the
      school if a volunteer can be found to transfer, creating an opening in the subject
      or grade level for which the educator is licensed and endorsed, or if another
      vacancy occurs at the school in a subject or grade level for which the educator
      is licensed and endorsed.
[e]   An involuntary transfer or reassignment will be made only after a conference
      between the teacher(s) involved and the principal(s) involved, at which time the
      teachers designated for transfer shall be given the specific reason(s) among the
      above criteria for their selection.
[f]   In the event the teacher desires further discussion of an involuntary transfer or
      reassignment following this conference, the Superintendent or his/her designee
      will meet with the teacher and at his/her request, an Association representative,
      to discuss the matter. Following such a conference, the decision of the
      Superintendent shall be final.
[g]   The District cannot guarantee that educators designated for involuntary transfer
      will be placed in positions matching their current assignments. However, the
      District will make every reasonable effort to place provisional educators
      designated for involuntary transfer in the same grade level or subject area in
      which they were previously assigned.
[h]   The District shall not be obligated to continue to employ individuals designated
      for involuntary transfer if they reject appropriate interviewing opportunities or
      assignment offers.
[i]   The District shall not be obligated to place educators in an endorsement area
      different from the one where they are presently assigned, regardless of
      certification, if they have not been employed to teach in that endorsement area
      within the last ten (10) years.
[j]   In the event a teacher provides a critical need for the school and where
      replacing the teacher could cause considerable hardship on the school, the
      principal may apply for a waiver of the involuntary transfer policy. The waiver
      may be granted upon approval of the District/DEA Liaison Committee.

                                                                                    Page 40
                                                                8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

              [k]   Employee reassignment from a grade level or subject area to another grade
                    level or subject area within the same school shall not be considered an
                    involuntary transfer. Similarly, employee reassignment within the same District
                    department or District program shall not be considered an involuntary transfer.
                    Such reassignments shall be made according to section 6.6.4[e].
             [l]    Principals of new schools shall promptly notify all interviewed involuntary
                    transfer candidates of their status. The notice shall clearly state whether the
                    educator is being selected, is not being selected, or is under further
                    consideration and will be informed promptly when a final decision is made.
     6.6.4 Priority of Assignment
             All teachers assigned to a school, including part-time teachers and those on leaves of
             absence, may request and be granted consideration for any vacancies in their school
             for which they are licensed and endorsed.
             [a]    Educators who wish to be considered for reassignment opportunities must
                    submit a completed Reassignment Request form to their principal. Educators
                    may submit the requests any time but are strongly encouraged to do so by
                    March 1. The District shall distribute the forms annually with the Letter of Intent
                    forms. Requests for reassignment shall be considered active for the current
                    calendar year only.
             [b]    Principals shall consider reassignment requests from these teachers before
                    selecting outside applicants or transfer candidates from other schools.
             [c]    Job openings filled through reassigning staff within a school need not be
                    announced or posted. However, before filling positions through reassignment,
                    the principal shall consider any written reassignment requests that have been
                    submitted prior to the opening being filled.
             [d]    When filling openings through reassignment, the principal shall not be required
                    to interview outside applicants or transfer applicants.
             [e]    When it is necessary to reassign an educator from one grade or subject area to
                    another grade or subject area within the school due to a change in enrollment
                    or the dissolution of a job share position, the principal shall make the final
                    reassignment decision(s) based on the following considerations:
                    (i)    the educational needs of the school;
                    (ii)   educators who volunteer for reassignment;
                    (iii) seniority of educators in the grade or subject area; and
                    (iv) educators’ experience, education, licensure, and endorsements.
             [f]    No teacher making a good faith effort to become Highly Qualified shall be
                    involuntarily transferred or reassigned solely on the basis of their Highly
                    Qualified status.
             [g]    Principals may involve other school staff members in considering reassignment
                    requests and making reassignment decisions.
             [h]    No provision in this policy shall prevent principals from asking educators to
                    accept reassignments or from requiring reassignments when deemed
                    appropriate.
6.7 POSTING OF JOBS
     Except in situations requiring that positions be filled immediately, professional job openings
     occurring during the school year shall be announced and posted in faculty rooms.
6.8 PROFESSIONAL APPEARANCE
     A professional appearance is encouraged for all educators. Care should be taken to dress in
     a manner which reflects well on the teaching profession and the District.
6.9 PROFESSIONAL OBLIGATIONS
     Educators are encouraged to avoid non-essential distractions of a personal or family nature
     during assigned work hours. Non-emergency personal phone calls or other similar disruptions
     during working hours should be avoided. Educators shall not bring their children to school on
     contract or professional development days unless authorized in advance by their principal.
6.10 ORDERLY TERMINATION PROCEDURES
     6.10.1 Purpose
             [a]    The Davis School District (the "District") and the Davis Education Association
                    (the "Association") find that the establishment of standards and procedures
                    which define and protect the rights of employees with respect to suspension or
                    termination of employment under various circumstances is in the best interests
                    of educators and administrators. The District and the Association therefore


                                                                                              Page 41
                                                          8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

              mutually endorse the provisions of the Utah Orderly School Termination
              Procedures Act § 53A-8-101 et seq., relating to orderly termination procedures
              and pursuant to said statute adopt the regulations which follow as to standards
              of due process and causes for termination.
       [b]    The Orderly Termination Procedures provided for herein shall not be applicable
              to Provisional Educators, except with respect to termination during the Contract
              Term (section 6.10.4). The Orderly Termination Procedures also shall not be
              applicable to temporary employees, inasmuch as temporary employees work at
              the will of the employer and have no expectation nor right to continued
              employment.
6.10.2 Definitions
       [a]    “Contract term” or “term of employment” means the period of time an educator
              is engaged by the District pursuant to a contract of employment whether oral or
              written. Unless expressly identified otherwise, this period is from July 1,
              through June 30.
       [b]    "Dismissal" or "termination" means:
              (i)    any termination of the status of employment of an employee;
              (ii)   failure to renew the employment contract of a career employee;
              (iii) reduction in base salary of an employee not generally applied to all
                     employees of the same category in the employ of the District during such
                     employee’s contract term;
              (iv) change of assignment of an employee with an accompanying reduction in
                     pay, unless such assignment change and salary reduction are agreed to
                     in writing; or
              (v)    a transfer or reassignment of an employee resulting in a loss of
                     compensation or benefits not affecting Base Salary shall not be
                     considered a “dismissal” or a “termination.”
       [c]    The term "salary" and "pay" as used herein mean and include only the Base
              Salary set forth in the schedules under sections 4.16 and 4.17. The terms
              "salary" and "pay" do not include compensation for extra duties (section 4.11.4),
              travel reimbursement (section 4.13), fringe benefits (section 5) or any other
              compensation or benefit not specifically included in the Base Salary.
       [d]    “Employee” means a person, other than the District superintendent or a
              temporary employee, who is a career or provisional employee of the District.
       [e]    “Provisional employee” means an individual, other than a career employee or a
              temporary employee who has been employed by the District on at least a half-
              time basis for fewer than three (3) consecutive full contract years. A classified
              career employee who accepts a licensed position shall be placed on provisional
              status for two (2) full contract years beginning the effective date of the licensed
              assignment. An educator who accepts another licensed position that is
              substantially different from the position in which career status was achieved
              may be transferred or reassigned by the District to a position similar to his/her
              original assignment should job performance concerns arise within two (2) years
              from the effective date of the substantially different assignment. The right to a
              hearing shall not apply when such transfers or reassignments are made by the
              District.
       [f]    “Career Employee” means an employee, not including a provisional or
              temporary employee, of Davis School District who has obtained a reasonable
              expectation of continued employment based upon an agreement with the
              employee or the employee’s association, District practice, or policy. Career
              employees who agree to take a different assignment with the District that is
              funded by a grant or other “soft” money do not relinquish their career status.
              Should funding for the position end, the employee will be eligible for transfer
              under the involuntary transfer policy.
       [g]    "Temporary employee" means an individual who is employed by the District on
              a temporary basis. Temporary employees include, but are not necessarily
              limited to, the following:
              (i)    substitute teacher and other substitute workers;
              (ii)   seasonal employees;
              (iii) employees hired under contracts for one (1) year only or for less than one
                     (1) year;
              (iv) employees whose positions are funded by grants; and

                                                                                        Page 42
                                                        8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

              (v)   employees whose positions are authorized for no more than twelve (12)
                    months.
6.10.3 Contract Non-Renewal
       Causes for which a contract may not be renewed include, but are not limited to:
       [a]   Unsatisfactory Performance
             When job performance deficiencies occur which would, in the opinion of the
             District subject an employee to contract non-renewal, the District shall provide
             such employee with a dated written notice (personal delivery or certified mail to
             the last known address) stating clearly the problem or problems pertaining to
             such employee and advising the employee that continued employment is in
             question at least one month prior to issuing notice of intent not to renew.
             (i)    An outline of procedures and available assistance to correct such job
                    performance deficiencies will be included in the written notice.
             (ii)   Upon receipt of such written notice, the employee shall take immediate
                    remedial action to remove or correct all such job performance
                    deficiencies and shall accept
                    and put into practice those suggestions, instructions or procedures
                    outlined.
             (iii) The employee has the obligation to outline in writing a plan for
                    improvement.
       [b]   If such job performance deficiencies are uncorrected, the employee’s contact
             shall be subject to non-renewal.
       [c]   Progress by the employee in correcting the job performance deficiencies and
             satisfactorily performing his/her duties will be evaluated by the District. After
             receiving notice of deficiencies, an employee will have an opportunity to discuss
             and counsel with his/her supervisor or administrator upon written request by the
             employee.
       [d]   In any non-renewal action pursuant to this section, the career educator shall be
             entitled to a hearing as provided in section 6.10.8.
       [e]   Nothing in this section shall preclude the dismissal of an employee for cause
             during the term of employment.
6.10.4 Termination During the Contract Term
       Termination of Contract for Cause. Sufficient grounds for termination of an
       employee's contract for cause are considered to be:
       [a]   neglect of employment obligation;
       [b]   incompetence;
       [c]   an act of serious insubordination, repeated acts of insubordination, or a pattern
             of insubordinate behavior;
       [d]   failure of a career employee to demonstrate substantial progress toward
             correcting or removing all job performance deficiencies identified in writing as
             causing unsatisfactory performance at the conclusion of the District remediation
             program under the “Davis Educator Assessment System” for the purpose of
             attempting to correct or remove such job performance deficiencies;
       [e]   failure of a provisional educator to demonstrate substantial progress toward
             correcting or removing all job performance deficiencies identified as causing
             unsatisfactory performance at the conclusion of the provisional educator
             corrective procedures outlined in the “Davis Educator Assessment System.”
       [f]   conviction of a felony in any state or federal court;
       [g]   conviction in a state or federal court of any crime which demonstrates moral
             turpitude;
       [h]   conviction, pleading “no contest,” or a plea in abeyance to a crime when there
             is evidence or acknowledgment of guilt to charges related to sexual abuse,
             child abuse, drugs, or public lewdness;
       [i]   conduct on school premises or with a student or students which violates any
             criminal law of the State of Utah or any federal criminal law;
       [j]   serious misconduct related to his/her job;
       [k]   excessive unauthorized absenteeism; or
       [l]   egregious violation of the “Davis School District Employee Code of Ethics.”
6.10.5 Disciplinary Action
       The District may elect to proceed with disciplinary action to warn the employee that
       his/her conduct places the employee in danger of termination during the contract
       term. The District may elect to exclude any or all of the following steps and proceed

                                                                                     Page 43
                                                           8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

       directly with termination for cause. No disciplinary action shall thereafter prejudice the
       right of the District to proceed with termination for cause on the same facts which
       gave rise to the disciplinary action.
       [a]    Oral Reprimand
              Oral reprimand may be issued by the immediate supervisor.
       [b]    Written Reprimand
              Written Reprimand - issued by the immediate supervisor or District
              Administration which warns the employee that his/her contract is in danger of
              being terminated.
              (i)    This warning is active for a two-year period and remains in the
                     employee’s District personnel file.
              (ii)   The warning does not prejudice the right of the District to proceed with
                     termination for cause should the misconduct continue.
       [c]    Probation
              The District may elect, but is not required to place the employee on probation
              for misconduct which could be grounds for termination during the contract term.
              (i)    The District is solely responsible for determining the length and terms of
                     probation.
              (ii)   Probation shall not prejudice the right of the District to proceed with
                     termination for cause on the same facts which gave rise to the probation.
       [d]    Suspension
               The District may, at its discretion, place the employee on suspension.
              (i)    The District shall be solely responsible for determining whether the
                     suspension is to be with or without pay and for determining the duration
                     of the suspension.
              (ii)   Suspension may, among other reasons, be invoked by the District when
                     further investigation is deemed necessary or desirable in order to make
                     an informed decision concerning the employment of an employee or for
                     the purpose of awaiting the outcome of criminal charges pending against
                     an employee.
              (iii) Suspension of a teacher shall not in any way prejudice the right of the
                     District to proceed with other action, including termination for cause, at a
                     later date.
              (iv) Furthermore, the fact that pending criminal charges against a teacher
                     may be resolved in favor of the teacher shall not preclude the District
                     from initiating termination for cause proceedings or other disciplinary
                     action against the teacher based all or in part upon the same facts which
                     gave rise to the criminal charges.
       [e]    Dismissal
              Any employee subject to disciplinary action shall be given the opportunity to be
              represented in any meeting or conference to which they are invited or required
              to attend with respect to the disciplinary action. A career employee who has
              been dismissed or suspended from employment pending further investigation
              may appeal such action as provided by this Agreement. The right to a hearing
              does not apply for suspensions of a limited duration invoked as disciplinary
              action rather than for purposes of investigation.
       [f]    Termination during the contract term may only be implemented by the
              Superintendent subject to ratification and approval by the Board of Education.
6.10.6 Notice Requirements
       [a]    Contract Non-Renewal Notification Requirements – Career Employee
              (i)    The District shall inform a career employee, at least thirty (30) calendar
                     days prior to issuing notice of intent not to renew his/her contract, that
                     continued employment is in question and the reasons for the anticipated
                     non-renewal or discontinuance of contract. The District shall then give
                     the educator an opportunity to correct the problem. The District may
                     grant the career employee assistance to correct the deficiencies,
                     including informal conferences and the services of school personnel
                     within the District.
              (ii)   If the District intends not to renew or continue the contract of employment
                     of a career employee, the District shall give notice of that intention to the
                     career employee at least thirty (30) calendar days before the end of the
                     contract term. The written notice shall be served by personal delivery or

                                                                                         Page 44
                                                           8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                     by certified mail addressed to the career employee’s last known address.
              (iii)  The notice shall show a date and contain a clear and concise statement
                     that the career employee’s contract will not be renewed or continued for
                     the next term and the reasons for the non-renewal or discontinuance.
       [b]  Contract Non-Renewal Notification Requirements – Provisional Employee
            (i)      The District shall provide written notice to a provisional employee at least
                     sixty (60) calendar days before the end of the provisional employee’s
                     contract if the employee will not be offered a contract for a subsequent
                     term of employment.
            (ii)     In the absence of a notice of intention not to renew, the employee is
                     considered employed for the next contract term with a salary based upon
                     the salary schedule applicable to the class of employee into which the
                     employee falls.
            (iii) Nothing in this section shall preclude the dismissal of an employee for
                     cause during the term of employment.
            (iv) In any non-renewal action pursuant to this section, the provisional
                     employee shall be entitled, upon written request, to an informal meeting
                     with the Superintendent or designee/s. Provisional employees whose
                     contracts are non-renewed or whose employment is terminated at the
                     end of the contract term shall not be entitled to a hearing with the Board
                     of Education or with a hearing examiner as provided in section 6.10.8.
       [c]  Termination During the Contract Term Notification Requirements
            At any time during the term of employment, the District may terminate an
            educator for cause upon giving written notice by personal delivery or certified
            mail to the last known address stating that employment shall terminate at a time
            fifteen (15) days or more from the date of notice, and stating the detailed
            reasons and evidence supporting such reasons.
6.10.7 Contract Non-Renewal Due to Necessary Staff Reduction
       [a]  Retention Preference Criteria
            In the event a reduction of staff is necessary because of decreasing student
            enrollments in the District, discontinuance of a particular service, unanticipated
            shortages of revenue following budget adoption or school consolidation, the
            following retention preference criteria shall apply:
            (i)      First retention preference shall be given to all employees, as a whole,
                     whose performance was rated satisfactory on their most recent
                     evaluation report.
            (ii)     Second retention preference shall be given on the basis of proper
                     certification and if the teacher meets basic training requirements.
            (iii) Third retention preference shall thereafter be given on the basis of
                     seniority.
       [b]  Notice to Association
            If it is necessary for the District to reduce the number of licensed employees,
            the District shall give the Association prior notice of the proposed action
            together with a statement of the reasons for the proposed reduction in force, the
            projected impact on the District, and the proposed time-frame within which the
            reduction in force is to be accomplished.
       [c]  Reduction in Force Procedures:
            (i)      Career employees who are identified for reduction in force shall be
                     assigned to other positions for which they are properly licensed, should
                     such positions become available according to section 6.6.3, Involuntary
                     Transfers. Refusal by employees to accept the first offering of a position
                     within five (5) working days relieves the Board of any further responsibility
                     to those employees.
            (ii)     Employees in provisional status who are identified for reduction in force
                     shall be given high priority for District positions for which they are
                     properly licensed. Employees subject to reduction in force also shall be
                     given high priority for District positions for which they may qualify with
                     provisional certification or through short-term retraining.
            (iii) An employee subject to reduction in force with three (3) or fewer years
                     remaining until eligibility for retirement shall receive the benefits of the
                     early retirement incentive program.
            (iv) An employee selected for non-renewal pursuant to this section shall be

                                                                                         Page 45
                                                           8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                     given written notice stating the reasons therefore at least one (1) month
                     prior to the end of the contract term. Notice shall be served by personal
                     delivery or certified mail to the last known address.
             (v)     The hearing requirements of section 6.10.8 hereafter shall not apply to
                     any termination under this section.
       [d]   Recall
             (i)     Career employees affected by a reduction in force will be recalled (in
                     order of seniority in the District) before provisional employees.
                     Employees will be placed in available positions for which they are
                     properly licensed. This will not restrict the District from filling vacancies
                     that exist for which no employee affected by the reduction in force
                     qualifies under the stated criteria.
             (ii)    An employee reemployed following termination because of reduction in
                     staff during the same contract year will return to the same step and lane.
             (iii) If hired in succeeding years under this policy, he/she shall be placed on
                     the next step and the same lane of the salary schedule unless in the
                     intervening time he/she has qualified for a lane change, in which case,
                     he/she shall be placed on the higher level lane.
             (iv) Sick leave which has been accrued by an employee at the time of
                     termination shall be reinstated at the time of reemployment.
             (v)     Refusal by the employee to accept the first offering within five (5) working
                     days of official notice of opening for which he/she is qualified relieves the
                     Board of any further responsibility to that employee. Allowance will be
                     made for appropriate notice to a current employer as required by the
                     employee’s current contract, if employed elsewhere, not to exceed twenty
                     (20) calendar days.
6.10.8 Fair Hearing Procedure
       [a]   A career employee who has been dismissed or suspended pending
             investigation is entitled to a hearing according to the terms of this agreement
             provided that the employee files a written request for a hearing with the
             Superintendent of the District not later than ten (10) working days after his/her
             receipt of a notice served pursuant to section 6.9.6.
             (i)     Timeliness of a mailed request shall be determined by postmark; and
             (ii)    Failure to file a timely request shall be deemed a waiver of hearing.
       [b]   Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the Superintendent of Schools or his/her
             designee shall schedule a preliminary conference to be held within fifteen (15)
             working days, and notice of which shall be given to the educator, and the
             employee’s association representative for the purpose of attempting to
             determine the merits of the appeal.
       [c]   If, after such preliminary conference, the appeal is not resolved to the
             satisfaction of the parties, the Superintendent or his/her designee shall
             schedule a hearing before the Board of Education for a date that is mutually
             acceptable to the parties but that shall not exceed sixty (60) days following the
             date upon which the preliminary conference was held. However, if the Board of
             Education appoints a hearing examiner as provided in section [d], the hearing
             shall be scheduled for a date that shall not exceed sixty (60) days following the
             date upon which the hearing examiner is appointed. At least ten (10) days
             written notice of the hearing date shall be given the educator and his/her
             representative unless the educator and his/her representative waive in writing
             such notice requirement.
       [d]   The Board of Education may appoint a hearing examiner as provided in the
             grievance procedure to ascertain whether there was compliance with these
             procedures for terminating employment, and to ascertain the reasonableness of
             the alleged basis for termination. The hearing examiner shall be notified of
             his/her selection by a letter from the Superintendent or his/her designee and the
             hearing examiner shall coordinate with counsel/representative for the District
             and the employee in setting a date and time for the hearing.
       [e]   The educator may be represented at any such hearing by counsel, produce
             witnesses, hear testimony against him/her, cross examine witnesses and
             examine documentary evidence. At any such hearing an Association
             representative may be present and state the Association position.
       [f]   The written recommendation of the hearing examiner shall include findings of

                                                                                         Page 46
                                                                8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                   fact and shall be subject to the final decision of the Board of Education.
                   Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of the District or the educator
                   to appeal to an appropriate court of law.
            [g]    The expenses of securing a hearing examiner shall be born equally by the
                   District and the educator. The employee’s association may assume
                   responsibility for the educator’s share.
6.11 EMPLOYMENT OBLIGATIONS
     6.11.1 Length of School Day
            The teacher agrees to a regular 7 ½ hour school day, including a daily scheduled duty
            free lunch period of at least thirty (30) minutes except in cases of inclement weather
            and emergency situations.
            [a]    The employment obligation involves a commitment of time and responsibility in
                   the supervision of students beyond the classroom during the school day.
            [b]    In addition, assignments will be necessary after school and during the evenings
                   to properly supervise various school activities and attend parent-teacher
                   meetings. Other evening activities which require attendance by all teachers
                   shall be scheduled after approval by the JSSC.
            [c]    Educators can be required to attend faculty meetings as scheduled by their
                   principals. These meetings may be held at times beyond the regular seven and
                   one-half (7½) hour school day, but should be held immediately before or after
                   the school day and shall not normally exceed forty-five (45) minutes outside the
                   school day. Meetings involving the entire faculty shall not exceed four (4)
                   meetings per month. Attendance at these meetings is not optional and shall not
                   entitle educators to additional compensation.
            [d]    Because some elementary teachers with larger class sizes are required to put
                   in extra time to prepare for and conduct SEP conferences, the District will
                   provide a stipend to compensate those teachers for additional time worked.
                   Each school shall receive funds calculated at twenty-five dollars ($25) per FTE.
                   Each year, the JSSC and principal shall develop a plan to divide those funds
                   among teachers with larger class sizes.
     6.11.2 The first and second Tuesday of each month will be identified for employee
            association business.
     6.11.3 The transportation to and from school is an individual responsibility. Therefore, no car
            pool arrangements should be made which interfere with the proper scheduling at the
            school where assigned.
     6.11.4 Outside Employment During School Year
            Since teaching is a major responsibility requiring a maximum effort, the teacher
            should not be gainfully employed in other remunerative work on school days during
            the school year where such work interferes with his/her effectiveness as a teacher.
     6.11.5 Employment Agreement
            In the event that an educator decides to terminate employment with the District,
            he/she shall give prior written notice of at least thirty (30) calendar days to the
            Superintendent. This notice requirement also shall apply to educators who terminate
            employment prior to the beginning of the school year. If, however, this procedure is
            not observed, the Superintendent reserves the right to impose a financial penalty of
            $500 and deduct the same from the educator's earnings.
     6.11.6 Electronic Information Resources Acceptable Use Agreement
            Educators agree to sign and abide by the “Electronic Information Resources
            Acceptable Use Agreement” as a condition of employment. This agreement is
            provided annually to all educators.
     6.11.7 Student Safety
            All District employees shall be responsible for helping to provide for student safety
            during emergencies and disasters as specified in the District Emergency
            Preparedness Plan. In the event of a major declared emergency or disaster, the
            Superintendent may issue a supplemental declaration providing that employees shall
            be designated as emergency/disaster service workers. All employees so designated
            shall be responsible during the declared period to help provide for the safety and well
            being of students under their care until the students are all accounted for and
            released from school. The Superintendent shall designate the duration of the
            emergency/disaster period. Employees designated as emergency/disaster service
            workers shall serve in this capacity until released by the Superintendent or
            designee(s).

                                                                                              Page 47
                                                                      8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

     6.12 STUDENT DISCIPLINE PROCEDURES
          6.12.1 Since discipline within the classroom is the basic responsibility of each teacher, good
                 procedure in handling unusual student behavior is necessary.
          6.12.2 A teacher may exclude a pupil from class when the grossness of the offense, the
                 persistence of the behavior or the disruptive effect of the violation makes the
                 continued presence of the pupil unacceptable.
                 [a]     In such cases, the student shall be excluded from the class for the remainder of
                         the class period with the appropriate transmittal slip to the principal or his/her
                         assistant.
                 [b]     The teacher shall furnish the principal or his/her assistant with the full
                         particulars of the incident as promptly as his/her teaching obligations will permit.
                 [c]     The excluded student shall report to a designated area within each school and
                         remain there until such time as a decision is made to allow the student to
                         remain at school or to call the parent or guardian to report to the school to
                         furnish transportation home.
          6.12.3 Each referral by the teacher to the principal or assistant shall be in writing.
                 [a]     This information shall be furnished on a school District form with a copy to be
                         retained by the principal and a copy to be returned to the teacher indicating the
                         action taken.
                 [b]     The principal or his/her assistant may request a conference with the teacher.
                         After a first referral, a conference with the teacher, the parent and the principal
                         or his/her assistant may be held.
          6.12.4 After a second referral by the same teacher during a semester, a conference involving
                 the teacher, the parent and the principal or his/her assistant is required.
          6.12.5 After a third or subsequent referral by the same teacher during a semester, classes
                 shall be closed to the student until a conference is held involving the teacher, the
                 parent and the principal or his/her assistant. The conference must be held
                 immediately and a decision shall be made as to the action to be taken and all parties
                 shall be promptly notified after the conference.
          6.12.6 If circumstances, warrant, the principal or his/her assistant may close classes to a
                 pupil prior to a third referral.
          6.12.7 Circumstances may exist which could alter the above procedure when in the best
                 interest of the child.
          6.12.8 The Board of Education of the Davis School District encourages and supports all
                 licensed personnel in maintaining proper respect and discipline by students within the
                 schools.

7.   ARTICLE VII GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

     7.1   DEFINITION
           A grievance shall mean a complaint by an educator or educators in Davis School District that
           there may have been a violation, misinterpretation or inequitable application of any provision
           in this agreement or other policies relating to the terms and conditions of their employment
           where an administrative appeals process is not set forth for that provision or policy.
     7.2   PURPOSE
           The purpose of the grievance procedure is to secure, at the closest point of origin, equitable
           solutions to grievances.
     7.3   REPRESENTATION
           Any grievant has the right to have an Association representative, counsel or any other
           representative of his/her choosing at all levels of the procedure. Use of a representative is not
           mandatory.
     7.4   REVIEW OF SERVICES
           7.4.1 Purpose
                    The Review of Services is a process for resolving, at the lowest level possible, conflict
                    between school District employees and for reviewing services provided by individuals
                    and/or programs.
           7.4.2 No educator shall suffer reprisals or reduction in status as a result of having
                    presented a review of services or having been a party in interest in a review of
                    services.
           7.4.3 Local Level - Informal Steps
                    [a]    The initiator of each review shall first communicate the nature of the problem to


                                                                                                    Page 48
                                                                8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                     the person on whom the review is being considered, with the objective of
                     resolving the matter informally and making it clear that a formal review is being
                     contemplated.
              [b]    If the problem/issue cannot be resolved at Step [a] within five (5) business
                     days, those initiating the review shall contact the supervisor of the person/s or
                     program/s to resolve the issues. This step may be waived if the principal is the
                     subject of the review, in which case the person filing the review may proceed to
                     the formal steps as outlined in 7.4.4 below.
              [c]    If resolution is not attained through the preceding steps, either party may notify
                     the appropriate District level administrator that the issues remain unresolved.
                     The District level administrator then shall initiate the following steps for
                     resolution.
      7.4.4   District Level - Formal Steps
              [a]    If resolution is not achieved through the Informal Steps, parties initiating the
                     review shall submit to the designated District level administrator a detailed
                     written description of the unresolved issues. In consultation with the person
                     initiating the review and/or the Association, the District level administrator may
                     designate an alternative District level administrator to hear the review. The
                     description shall clearly state the specific reasons for the review and shall
                     specify the remedy requested. Unless the nature of the complaint or the
                     circumstances require confidentiality, copies of the written description of the
                     unresolved issues will be provided to all affected parties.
              [b]    The designated District level administrator shall then schedule and conduct a
                     meeting with the parties directly involved in the review. During the meeting, the
                     parties initiating and responding to the review shall be provided an opportunity
                     to state their concerns and positions pertaining to the unresolved issues.
              [c]    After the meeting in Step [b], the administrator shall submit findings and
                     recommendations for resolution in writing within ten (10) business days of the
                     meeting. to the parties involved.
      7.4.5   Office of the Superintendent
                     If the conflict has not been resolved the review will be sent to the Office of the
                     Superintendent for a decision which will be given within ten (10) business days
                     of the completion of the formal steps.

7.5   GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
      7.5.1 Informal
            Should educators believe that there is a basis for a grievance, they may discuss the
            grievance with the principal, immediate supervisor and/or the education association
            representative with the objective of resolving the matter. To initiate the grievance
            process, the educator must inform the principal or immediate supervisor that the
            complaint is at the informal grievance level. The grievance shall be initiated no later
            than ninety (90) calendar days following the event or action being grieved.
            Proceedings should be kept as informal and confidential as may be appropriate for its
            determination. This, however, does not limit the right of any employee who has a
            grievance to discuss the matter informally with any other appropriate member of the
            District administration.
      7.5.2 Formal
            [a]    Step 1: If, after the required informal discussion with the building principal or
                   supervisor, a grievance still exists, the educator may invoke the formal
                   grievance procedure.
                   (i)   This grievance must be in written form, dated and signed by the grievant
                         and delivered to the principal or supervisor.
                   (ii)  Within five (5) working days, the principal shall meet with the grievant,
                         who may be accompanied by his/her chosen representative.
                   (iii) The principal shall indicate his/her disposition of the grievance in writing
                         within five (5) working days of the meeting and shall furnish a dated copy
                         thereof to the educator.
            [b]    Step 2: If the educator is not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance at
                   Step 1, or if no decision has been rendered within five(5) additional working
                   days, the dated complaint will be forwarded by the grievant within five (5) more
                   working days, to the Superintendent of Schools or his/her designee.
                   (i)   The Superintendent or designee shall hold within five (5) working days an

                                                                                              Page 49
                                                                    8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                                interview with the aggrieved employee and/or his chosen representative.
                         (ii)   The Superintendent or designee shall render his/her written decision
                                within five (5) working days of the interview.
                   [c]  Step 3: If the educator is not satisfied with the decision rendered in Step 2, the
                        educator and/or the educator’s representative may, within ten (10) working days
                        of receipt of the decision, request the submission of the grievance to a hearing
                        examiner.
                        (i)     The Board and the educator’s representative shall agree to meet within
                                twenty (20) days of the hearing request. This timeline may be extended
                                by mutual agreement. In the event that the educator and/or the
                                educator’s representative fails to meet to choose a hearing examiner, the
                                grievant will be deemed to have accepted the result of Step 2 and the
                                grievance will be considered to be resolved.
                        (ii)    The Board and the educator and/or the educator’s representative shall
                                attempt to agree upon a mutually acceptable hearing examiner.
                        (iii) If they are unable to agree, each party shall select a representative.
                        (iv) Those two shall meet within twenty (20) days to jointly select a qualified
                                hearing examiner who may be selected from the American Arbitration
                                Association Hearing Examiner Pool and whose findings shall constitute a
                                written recommendation to the Board of Education. The timeline may be
                                extended by mutual agreement.
                        (v)     This report will be made only in executive session to the Board of
                                Education with the educator, and/or his/her representative in attendance.
                                The expenses of securing a hearing examiner shall be borne equally by
                                the District and educator. The employee’s association may assume
                                responsibility for the educator’s share.
                   [d]  Step 4: If the educator is not satisfied with the decision rendered in Step 3, the
                        educator and/or his/her chosen representative may request and be granted an
                        informal hearing before the Board of Education in executive session. The
                        Board will notify the educator of its decision within five (5) business days
                        following the informal hearing. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the
                        right of the District or the educator to appeal to an appropriate court of law.
           7.5.3   General Provisions
                   [a]  No educator shall suffer reprisals or reduction in status as a result of having
                        presented a grievance or having been a party in interest in the grievance
                        procedure.
                   [b]  When any party finds good reason why the time requirements in this procedure
                        cannot be met, a maximum extension of ten (10) days is allowed. The party
                        which requires the extension shall notify the other parties indicating the reason
                        thereof.
                   [c]  All documents, communications and records dealing with the processing of a
                        grievance will be filed in a separate grievance file and will not be kept in the
                        District personnel file of the participants.
                   [d]  Both parties agree to make available all relevant information not privileged in
                        their possession or control.
                   [e]  No provision contained in this Grievance Procedure shall be deemed to
                        constitute an arbitration agreement.
                   [f]  Once a final determination is made on a grievance, the events or issues that
                        initiated the grievance may not be grieved again unless new significant
                        information pertinent to the grievance is reported.

8.   ARTICLE VIII PROFESSIONAL COMMITTEE

     8.1   LIAISON COUNCIL AND STUDY COMMITTEES
           8.1.1 Communication Between Administration and Licensed Personnel
                 The principles set forth herein shall serve as a guide for the maintenance of orderly
                 methods of communication between the Administration and licensed personnel of the
                 District by providing for:
                 [a]    A uniform and equitable basis for licensed personnel relations within the school
                        District.
                 [b]    The exchange of information and ideas in an informal and cooperative manner.
                 [c]    Bringing together points of view of the administrators and the licensed

                                                                                                 Page 50
                                                           8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

               personnel to insure increased effectiveness in the School District service,
               together with improved well-being of those employed.
8.1.2   District Liaison Council
        There shall be established a Liaison Council at the District level. The Liaison Council
        shall consist of administrators designated by the Superintendent and an equal
        number of educators designated by the Association. The Liaison Council shall meet
        bimonthly during the school year or more often as business dictates, to discuss and
        study subjects mutually agreed upon relating to the school system.
        [a]    The Liaison Council is empowered to appoint committees to study and report
               subjects agreed upon by the Council. On completion of its report and study on
               the subject assigned, each committee shall be considered dissolved and once
               dissolved, no committee shall be reactivated except by the Council.
        [b]    The clerical expenses of the Liaison Council and its subcommittees shall be
               paid from school District funds as approved by the Superintendent of Schools.
8.1.3   Representatives of the District Special Education Department and the association will
        meet at last quarterly for the purpose of sharing information necessary for preventing
        and solving special education problems that arise both at the school and District level.
        Special educators with concerns are encouraged to communicate those concerns to
        the association or the District Special Education Department.
8.1.3   Teacher Involvement
        The Board of Education through the Superintendent's office recognizes the
        professional training and experience of its teachers and considers their involvement
        and judgment essential in the development of educational policies.
        [a]    The Board especially recognizes the value of teachers participation in the
               following areas:
               (i)    Evaluation, review, selection and development of curriculum materials.
               (ii)   Identification of needs and development of programs for in-service and
                      pre-service training.
               (iii) Reviewing and upgrading of methods of evaluating students and licensed
                      personnel.
               (iv) Solution of problems of student discipline and attendance.
        [b]    The Board has established a District Liaison Council and in each school, a Joint
               Staff School Committee to provide effective involvement of teachers. District
               policies and programs should reflect this philosophy of involvement of teachers
               as should policies and programs established at the school building level.[
8.1.4   Joint Staff School Committee
        [a]    The Joint Staff School Committee shall be established in each school from the
               licensed and classified staff of that school to provide for orderly and
               professional means of improving the educational programs, professional and
               public relations and the conditions within the school, including oversight of other
               school committees.
        [b]    Minimum representation of the Joint Staff School Committee shall be:
               (i)    The principal and/or assistant principal(s), all duly elected or appointed
                      faculty representatives of the Association, additional members of the
                      teaching staff as elected by the faculty, Quality Teaching Liaison, and two
                      classified employees, one a member of the exclusive bargaining agent
                      representing classified employees and the other at large.
               (ii)   Election of faculty members to the Joint Staff School Committee shall be
                      conducted by the representatives of the Association.
               (iii) The committee shall elect its own chairperson by secret ballot.
               (iv) A representative from JSSC should serve as a member of the school
                      Community Council to facilitate communications between the two groups.
        [c]    Additional participation or representation on the committee will be determined
               by the committee as needs arise.
        [d]    Any school staff member may introduce any items of business or points of view
               for consideration by the committee.
               (i)    Committee activities shall be reported to all members of the staff within
                      five working days after each meeting.
               (ii)   The committee shall meet monthly and more often as business dictates.
        [e]     When appropriate or necessary, the JSSC may refer matters to the District
               Liaison Council.
        [f]    The District Liaison Council and the Joint Staff School Committees are subject

                                                                                         Page 51
                           to the provisions of the Davis Educators Agreement.
                  [g]      A school’s Joint Staff School Committees may request waivers from the current
                           negotiated agreement by application to the District Liaison Council.
                           (i)    The requests shall be in writing and shall indicate the section of the
                                  Agreement the JSSC is requesting to have waived. The request must
                                  also include a description of the procedure or policy being proposed as
                                  an alternative to the waived policy and an explanation of how the
                                  proposed alternative will help the school better meet District and/or
                                  school goals.
          8.1.5 School Budgeting
                    Each school will maintain a Budget Advisory Committee. The principal may designate
                    or modify an existing school committee as the Budget Advisory Committee if it meets
                    the minimum membership qualifications noted below. This committee shall include
                    representation from the school administration, staff, parents, and, where applicable,
                    students. Staff members on the committee will be elected by the faculty in an election
                    conducted by the JSSC.
                    [a]    The committee will advise the school administration in developing the school’s
                           budget in accordance with the school’s strategic plan.
                    [b]    The school administration will submit a plan for the expenditure of all
                           anticipated District allocated revenues to the Budget Advisory Committee for its
                           input and advice.
                    [c]    A completed budget and a summary report of actual expenditures will be given
                           to the Budget Advisory Committee and to the school’s director.
                    [d]    The committee will meet a minimum of twice a year and minutes shall be
                           distributed to staff members after each meeting.
    8.2   DISTRICT COMMITTEES
          It is agreed by the Davis School District Board of Education and the Association that it is in the
          best interest of all parties to have teacher participation in all District committees which are
          making decisions that pertain directly to students, teachers, or the classroom. In order to
          promote collaboration and maximum teacher participation on such committees, the following
          guidelines shall be agreed upon for such committees:
          8.2.1 The District shall determine when teacher participation is appropriate on a District
                    committee. Any committee formed by the District that deals with issues that relate
                    directly to students, teachers or the classroom will be comprised of equal
                    representation of teachers and administrators. Through the Liaison process, the
                    Association will be notified whenever the District establishes such a committee.
          8.2.2 Teacher representatives on District committees shall be selected by the Association
                    President, unless the committee chair and Association President have mutually
                    agreed that teacher representatives shall be selected by the District. In such cases,
                    the Association President shall be notified as to which teacher representatives have
                    been selected. Teacher representatives will be mutually agreeable to the Association
                    and the District.
          8.2.3 When teachers are invited to attend District committee meetings, whenever possible
                    they will receive at least one (1) weeks notice of the initial meeting date to facilitate
                    their attendance.
          8.2.4 If classified employees are directly affected by decisions being made by a committee,
                    they shall be represented on the committee in proportion to teachers and the District.



    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Agreement as of July 1, 2007.




___________________________________                      _____________________________________
Marian Storey, President                                 Susan Firmage, President
Davis Board of Education                                 Davis Education Association




                                                                                                    Page 51
                                                                      8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                                        LETTER OF INTENT
For the 2008-2009 school year the Davis School District and the Davis Education Association agree to
the following:

     1.    ELEMENTARY PREP TIME

           It is the intent of the Davis School District Board of Education and Davis Education
           Association to continue to work collaboratively to enhance the elementary prep time program.

     2.    SECONDARY PARENT NOTIFICATION OF U AND F GRADES

           Since the District policy (5S-404) requires teachers of secondary students to notify parents
           before assigning a “U” in citizenship or “F” grade, since the time required for such notification
           is considerable, and since all forms of improved communication between parents and
           teachers benefits students, it is the intent of the Davis School District Board of Education and
           the Association to ensure that the teacher grading program, Encore, be updated to include
           improved and simple methods for teachers to send failing and/or “U” notices through email or
           printed letters when parental email addresses are unavailable.

     3.    SCHOOL TECHNOLOGY SPECIALIST TASK FORCE

           It is agreed that Davis School District and the Association form a Task Force to evaluate the
           School Technology Specialist position. It shall be facilitated by A District representative as
           appointed by the Superintendent, or designee, and shall be comprised of four representatives
           appointed by each of the following:
                     •     the education association
                     •     the classified association
                     •     Davis School District Superintendent, or designee
           This Task Force will prepare a report with their recommendations and present this to a joint
           Liaison Council of the educators and classified associations by May 4, 2009.




                                                                                                    Page 52
                                                                        8DA - Davis Educators’ Agreement

                                  Davis School District Employee
                                          Code of Ethics


      It is expected that employees shall adhere to the "Davis School District Employee Code of Ethics."
Employees involved in any capacity in the education of young people must represent the highest
standards and values of the community. The purpose of this code is to establish ethical standards for the
conduct of all District employees. Following these standards will ensure the highest principles of behavior
and uphold the trust vested in us by our community. As employees of the Davis School District, we
assume the responsibility for representing the District in a manner characterized by trust, morality, and
ethical principles. All employees shall:

(1) Treat students, parents, fellow employees, and community members with dignity and respect,
demonstrating fairness and sensitivity for ethnic, religious, and cultural heritage.
(2) Promote a safe, nurturing, and positive school and work environment.
(3) Establish and maintain open and positive communication with patrons and fellow employees.
(4) Maintain confidentiality concerning students, families, and employees, and avoid spreading rumors.
(5) Address problems and grievances in an appropriate manner, beginning with the person closest to the problem.
(6) Demonstrate knowledge of and act in accordance with District policies and procedures, as well as legal
and contractual standards, responsibilities, and obligations.
(7) Support the District Plan for Fostering Educational Excellence.
(8) Demonstrate a commitment to learning and professional growth.
(9) Dress appropriately.
(10) Model and promote appropriate language.
(11) Use facilities and equipment in a manner that protects the resources and property of the District.
(12) Protect District assets and financial resources by following accepted accounting practices and District
policy.
(13) Comply with the Utah Ethics Act and refrain from using one's position for personal gain, including
disclosing any substantial personal investments in any business entity which will crate a conflict of interest
between my private interest and my public duties by filing a “Disclosure Pursuant to Utah Public Officers’
and Employees’ Act” form.
