                       District and DEA Negotiations for 2009-10
                                Language Items Summary
                      (The full text of the language items will be emailed to members.)

2.      ARTICLE II RECOGNITION
        Language changes were needed in this section to conform to state and federal statutes
              regarding recognized organizations.

2.67    EXCEPTED PERSONNEL
        Language was clarified regarding who is covered by our agreement with the district.

4.      ARTICLE IV CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT
        Section 4.1.1 [a] [b] and [c] are suspended for the 2009-2010 school year. Refer to the
        Letter of Intent item 2. Quality Teaching. (current language to remain)

       2.    QUALITY TEACHING (Letter of Intent Language printed here for this important
             item.)
             “Recognizing that the Quality Teaching Block Grant was not funded by the Legislature, the
             seven (7) teacher contract days funded by that grant were suspended. It is the intent of the
             district to restore five (5) of the seven (7) teacher contract days for the 2009-2010 contract
             year. These days shall herein be known as “Professional Days.” Further, it is the intent of
             the parties to suspend section 4.1 [a], [b] and [c] of this agreement until such time as the
             funding for the Quality Teaching Block Grant is reinstated. The following language will be
             used in place of this section.
             CONTRACT DAYS
             [a]         Full-time educators in schools on a traditional calendar will work 186 days; those
             in schools on a year-round calendar will work 178 days.
             [b]         Five contract days will be designated as Professional Days. These days will be
             used for activities that support the district, school, department/grade level and individual
             professional development activities as outlined by each site’s School Improvement Plan
             with input from the JSSC.
                        [i]        The 2009-2010 calendar includes a total of five (5) Professional Days.
                        Two (2) of these days are calendared prior to the beginning of the school year
                        (August 20 and 21, 2009). The additional three (3) days appear at the end of the
                        first, second, and third terms, on the traditional calendar. Schools on the year-
                        round calendar have adjusted schedules that incorporate these days.
                        [ii]       Realizing that two (2) contract days have not been replaced,
                        administrators shall be sensitive to teachers’ needs as they prepare for the school
                        year. School trainings during the Professional Days shall be planned in
                        consultation with the JSSC.
                        [iii]      Any district training during the Professional Days will be discussed
                        and/or implemented through the association/district liaison process, balancing
                        district and school needs.
              [c]       In addition to the five (5) Professional Days, educators have one contract day
              (August 19, 2009) prior to the beginning of the school year reserved for individual and
              team planning activities. School and District meetings and activities will not be held
              during this time.”
                                                     1
4.2    SALARY DETERMINATIONS
       4.2.5 [a] Extended Year Contracts
               Secondary Librarians are now referred to as Library Media Teachers
       4.2.6 Qualifications for Additional Salary Lanes
               Converts references from quarter hours to equivalent semester hours

4.8    JUNIOR HIGH FRIDAY EARLY OUT
       Puts practice into the agreement.

4.9    HIGH SCHOOL LATE START
       Adjusts language to conform to procedure.

4.10   SCHOOL SCHEDULING - New
       When schools want to make a schedule change the principal must get recommendations
       from JSSC, staff and Community Council before presenting to superintendent.

4.12   GUIDELINES FOR EDUCATORS NEW TO THE TEACHING PROFESSION
       Adds an addendum to the contract, already approved by the district liaison process, to
       provide protections for teachers new to the profession.

5.1    GROUP INSURANCE
       Changes references from daily hours to weekly hours to determine eligibility for
       insurance.

5.9    PAYROLL PROCEDURES
       Changes payroll ending date to the fifteenth of the month rather than the twentieth.

4.7    YEAR-ROUND SCHOOLS
       4.7.1 Strengthens provisions for teachers to request track and school assignments.

5.9    ACCOMMODATIONS FOR EMPLOYEE’S CHILDREN - New
       Expands teacher’s ability to request variances for their children to accommodate work
       and family needs.

6.2    JOB SHARING
       6.2.4 Absences
       Puts practice regarding substitute pay for long term absences into the language.

6.5    TEACHER FILES
       Teachers may request material be removed from their school files after seven years.

6.11   EMPLOYMENT OBLIGATIONS
       Sets aside time for DEA meetings on the second Monday and Tuesday
                                              2
LETTER OF INTENT

3.    FUTURE FUNDING
      The Board of Education recognizes the vital contribution employees make toward the Davis
      School District mission to foster educational excellence. Therefore, it is the intention of the
      district to financially acknowledge employees’ service by funding salary steps. However, in
      consideration of the limited funding available for the 2009-2010 contract year, lane changes shall
      be funded and salary steps shall be suspended for the 2009-2010 contract year.
      When the Legislature increases funding for public education, new revenue will be allocated
      through the Interest Based Facilitation Team (IBFT) and negotiations with the association.

4.    SUSPENSION OF EDUCATION REIMBURSEMENT
      In consideration of the limited funding available for the 2009-10 contract year, it is the intent of
      the district and the association to suspend educational reimbursement funding and awards as
      provided in Section 5.11.5 of the 2008-09 Davis Educators= Agreement.

5.    DISTRICT RETIREMENT INCENTIVES
      The association and district shall work through the liaison process to minimize the financial
      impact of losing days during the 2009-2010 school year on retirees who apply for early retirement
      in 2009-2010 only.

2.6   SECONDARY PARENT NOTIFICATION OF U AND F GRADES
      Since the District policy (5S-404) requires teachers of secondary students to notify parents before
      assigning a “U” in citizenship or “F” grade, since the time required for such notification is
      considerable, and since all forms of improved communication between parents and teachers
      benefits students, it is the intent of the Davis School District Board of Education and the
      Association to ensure that the teacher grading program, Encore, be updated to include improved
      and simple methods for teachers to send failing and/or ‘U’ notices through email or printed letters
      when parental email addresses are unavailable. A proposal of the requested changes shall be
      submitted by the association at the District Liaison Council no later than October 31, 2009.

7.    PART-TIME/JOB SHARE REQUIREMENTS
      The Davis School District and the Davis Education Association will form a Task Force to
      evaluate reasonable and appropriate expectations and contractual obligations in relation to staff
      meetings and trainings for part time and job share teachers. The Task Force will also create a
      document which explains the Job Share program, clarifying how job share positions are created
      and dissolved, and the responsibilities and rights of teachers in job share positions. The Task
      Force will prepare a report with their recommendations which will be presented to a DEA-District
      Liaison Council no later than January 29, 2010. The DEA and the Superintendent will consult on
      the makeup of the committee.

8.    DISTRICT RETIREMENT INCENTIVES STUDY COMMITTEE
      It is the intent of the district and the association to establish a study committee to review possible
      options to assure the financial viability of the district retirement incentives. The study committee
      shall be facilitated by a district representative as appointed by the Superintendent and shall be
      comprised of: four representatives as appointed by the education association; four representatives
      as appointed by the classified association; two representatives as appointed by the principals
      associations; four representatives as appointed by the Superintendent. The study committee shall

                                                    3
          report findings and make recommendations to a joint Liaison Council of the classified, educators,
          and principals associations by March 31, 2010.

9.        LANE CHANGE PROVISION REVIEW
          It is the intent of the district and the association to have the District Lane Change Committee
          review the provision in the Davis Educators’ Agreement providing that “In order to be eligible for
          lane change credit, courses cannot be part of the requirements for the educator’s bachelor’s
          degree or original teacher licensure.” (Section 4.2.6[b](ii)) The committee shall evaluate the
          provision as it would apply to traditionally licensed educators, educators in the Alternative Routes
          to Licensure Program, related servers and counselors. Recommendations regarding clarification
          or adjustment of the current language shall be presented by a representative of the Committee to
          the Educators’ Liaison Council by March 31, 2010.

                                                       Addendum #1
                                          Educators New to the Teaching Profession
                                              Workload Task Force Guidelines
                                        Approved Tuesday, May 13, 2008 in DEA Liaison

Guidelines for Educators New to the Teaching Profession (first three years):

1.        Secondary - No more than two teaching preparations for educators new to the teaching profession. This would depend
on curricular subject area needs. Elementary – No split grade level assignments for three years.

2.         In the first year for a educator new to the teaching profession: coaching or extra-duty assignments, i.e., Lunch duty,
JSSC, bus duty, committee assignments, etc., should be limited, if possible. Secondary – if hired into an area in the curriculum
specific to activities, i.e., physical education, debate, drama, etc., assignments may be given to coach in one or two sports. If
assigned to teach in core curricular areas, administrators need to be very sensitive to the extra-duty coaching assignments given.
Elementary – avoid, if possible, assigning educators new to the profession to major committees.

3.        No educators new to the teaching profession will be assigned a student teacher.

4.        Administrators should offer support to new educators hired to teach in curricular areas that require teaching more than
two preparations. The Principal or his/her designee will communicate procedures/protocols inherent in the school to all teachers
new to the building, program or grade level, i.e., budgets/financial process, extra-duty assignments, co-curricular, coaching,
committees, etc.

5.        Secondary educators new to the teaching profession should not serve as department chair during their first two years.

6.        Administrators should be very careful when approaching new secondary educators to take on productivity teaching
assignments. Administrators should always let the teacher know that this is a choice, not a required assignment. Teachers can
refuse with no consequences. Do not use “we need you to teach,” it is always “would you like to teach productivity” – eliminate
pressure. No productivity in first year!

7.        Maintain open lines of communication with educators new to the teaching profession. Administrators, mentors, and
school directors to have open and candid discussions as to the needs and conditions that will enhance a new educator’s
experience.

8.       E.S.L. endorsement will be encouraged within the first three years of a new educator’s experience. Becoming E.S.L.
endorsed should not be a first year requirement.

9.        Educators new to the profession should not be placed in portable classrooms, if possible.




                                                                 4
