       AGREEMENT AND PARTNERSHIP

                 between

        School District No. 1 in the

City and County of Denver, State of Colorado

                    and

 Denver Classroom Teachers Association

   September 1, 2022 – August 31, 2025




               www.dpsk12.org
          http://denverteachers.org
  http://careers.dpsk12.org/teachercomp/
                           TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                   1
STATEMENT OF BELIEFS                                                                3
FRAMEWORK FOR PARTNERSHIP                                                           4
STANDARDS FOR BEHAVIORS IN OUR PARTNERSHIP                                          5
Article 1 - Definitions                                                             7
Article 2 - General                                                                 8
Article 3 - Covered Employees and Recognition                                       9
Article 4 - Effective Dates                                                        10
Article 5 –                                                                        10
Educator Voice, Joint Activities, and Leadership Teams                             10
Article 6 - Negotiating Procedure                                                  19
Article 7 - Grievance Procedure                                                    21
Article 8 - Professional Standards                                                 28
Article 9 - Central Office Educator Files                                          36
Article 10 - Performance Evaluations                                               37
Article 11 - Complaints Against Teachers/Administrative Leave/Corrective Action    54
Article 12 - Instructional Materials                                               56
Article 13 - Assignments, Schedules and Transfer                                   57
Article 14 - Summer School and Evening School                                      68
Article 15 - Educator Facilities                                                   69
Article 16 - Personal Injury Benefits and Property Damage                          70
Article 17 - Assaults                                                              72
Article 18 - Student Discipline                                                    73
Article 19 - Personal Health Problems                                              74
Article 20 - Leaves of Absence                                                     75
Article 21 - Association Rights                                                    82
Article 22 - Job Sharing and Half-Time                                             85
Article 23 - Professional Behavior                                                 85
Article 24 - Controversial Issues in the Classroom                                 86
Article 25 - Substitute Teachers                                                   87
Article 26 - Benefits Allowance and Benefits Programs                              88
Article 27 - Other Benefits Provided to Teachers and SSPs                          90
Article 28 - Extra Duty Compensation                                               92
Article 29 – Specialized Service Providers and Whole Child Supports                95
Article 30 - Innovation                                                            97
Article 31 - Equity in the School District                                        103
Article 32 - Balarat Outdoor Education Teachers                                   105
Article 33 - Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps (JROTC) Instructors            108
Article 34 - Associate Teachers                                                   112



                                    2 of 137
      Article 35 - Educational Sign Language Interpreters                              113
      Article 36 - Career and Technical ProTech Instructors                            116
      Article 37 - Professional Compensation System for Educators                      117
      (Beginning August 1, 2022)                                                       117

Appendix A – Ballot Language for the ProComp Mill Levy Override Approved by Denver Voters
November 1, 2005.                                                                       130
      Index by Article number                                                           132




                                         3 of 137
                                STATEMENT OF BELIEFS
The Board and the Association share the belief that providing a high quality education for
the children of Denver is the paramount objective of the District. Both parties affirm that
the educational program should be sensitive to the needs and aspirations of children,
regardless of race, color, ethnic background, creed or economic status. This is reflected
in the mission statements adopted by the Denver Classroom Teachers Association and
the Denver Public Schools.

The mission of the Denver Public Schools, the center of Community learning, is to
guarantee that our children and youth acquire knowledge, skills, and values to become
self-sufficient citizens by providing personalized learning experiences for all students in
innovative partnerships with all segments of the Community. Community involvement is
critical to the success of our schools. The goals of the District are established by the
Board of Education with input from the Community. Each school site will be required to
form a Collaborative School Committee (CSC).

The Denver Classroom Teachers Association (DCTA) is a professional organization of
recognized educational leaders. We advocate for the rights and responsibilities of all
educators, and for an ethical system of quality public education for all students.

Quality teaching and high teacher morale promote positive learning environments for
students. Attaining the educational goals of the Denver Public Schools requires mutual
understanding and cooperation between the Board and the Association. To this end,
good-faith negotiations between the Board and the Association with a free and open
exchange of views are desirable.

In negotiating this Agreement, the Board and the Association, with the concurrence of the
Community, have three major goals for joint school reform efforts:

          ● Greater success for all students as reflected in higher achievement.

          ● A significantly higher completion rate that moves the District toward its goal
            of graduating all students from the K-12 educational program.

          ● An improvement in the Community's level of confidence that the Denver
            Public Schools, as an institution, provides effective education for all
            students.

                          FRAMEWORK FOR PARTNERSHIP

It is in the interest of both the District and the Association that the terms of the
Agreement be understood and enforced. The Agreement between the District and the
Association is typically referred to as the teachers’ contract. In some quarters, this
reference implies that the Agreement is solely for the benefit of the teachers and
minimizes the benefits that result to the District through the Agreement.



                                          4 of 137
Enforcement of and compliance with the Agreement is essential. However, both parties
have a greater interest in developing a joint ownership and commitment in terms of both
the letter and spirit of the Agreement. The Agreement will become essential to furthering
the desired partnership between the District and the Association. The District and the
Association recognize their collective responsibility to promote positive change in the
Denver Public Schools in an effort to promote education reform to benefit all students
and to ensure professional collaboration between the District and the Association.
Following is a systemic framework for improving the enforcement of the Agreement while
laying a foundation for joint ownership and a greater commitment to living under the
terms of the Agreement.

          ● Interest-Based Bargaining. Our use of Interest-Based Bargaining will
            contribute to the joint ownership, enforcement and commitment of the
            resulting Agreement. We are aware of our efforts and the environment that
            it is creating for a strong partnership relationship. We recommend utilizing
            an Interest-Based approach for problem solving and decision making in all
            areas of the District.

          ● The Agreement. The Agreement reflects the core beliefs and values of the
            District and the Association. It utilizes clear and unambiguous language to
            describe the procedures all teachers and administrators will follow. In doing
            so, we will improve our success in increased learning for all students and
            closing the achievement gap.

          ● Training. We recognize the need for regular training jointly with
            administrators and teachers in this Agreement. The training should focus
            not just on the rules, but also emphasize problem-solving skills and
            relationship building.

          ● Organizational Structure. Organizations in the District have an explicit role
            in supporting and promoting the enforcement of and commitment to the
            Agreement. The Board and the Association governance bodies understand
            the importance of their roles, encouraging everyone in the District to
            respect the terms of the Agreement and use it as a tool to jointly resolve
            legitimate differences.

          ● Communications. A formal communications strategy will be developed to
            share and explain information about this Agreement.




                                        5 of 137
                STANDARDS FOR BEHAVIORS IN OUR PARTNERSHIP

In an effort to foster and support a greater commitment in terms of both the letter and
spirit of the Agreement, the District and Association offer the following partnership
guidelines. These guidelines suggest ways that will support positive change within
Denver Public Schools in our efforts to resolve educational issues and to promote
positive change to the benefit of all students.

In addition, these guidelines offer additional techniques to ensure more effective
collaborative problem solving between the District and the Association. It is important
that we all make a concerted effort to utilize an Interest-Based approach for problem
solving and decision-making in all areas of the District.

These guidelines can be applied at the District level, in the school building, and in
one-on-one situations. Our collective ability to successfully use this approach will
contribute to and enhance a positive school and District climate.

Practical Guidelines.

      Use an Interest-Based approach to problem solving. Agree on what needs to be
worked on.

          ● Jointly launch the initiative together.
          ● Take on issues honestly and openly – not based on who has the power.
          ● Focus on an outcome(s) that will advance the educational goals of the
            District.
          ● Have clear timelines and deliverables.
          ● Respect the views of all parties and their right and responsibility to express
             these views.
                 Contribute the best you have to work on the problem.
                 Recognize you may see things from different perspectives.
                 Disagree without being disagreeable.
                 Recognize each other’s roles as a representative of another constituent
          group.
          ● Jointly validate information received.
               Gather necessary information before making a decision.
               Gather expertise from both within and outside of the District.
          ● Jointly communicate in an appropriate and timely manner.
               Have an in-depth communications plan.
               Communicate progress and final results.
               Give the same answers together as partners.
               Give each other a heads up – don’t blindside.
               Assume the best of the other party, not the worst.
          ● Learn from your mistakes.


                                          6 of 137
                Build in processes for evaluation and feedback.

                                 Article 1 - Definitions

1-1   The term “Community” as used in these Articles shall include parents and other
      Denver Community members.

1-2   The term “teacher” as used in this Agreement shall mean all non­administrative
      teaching personnel, employed half-time or more, who are licensed by the
      Colorado Department of Education as teachers, including others who are
      authorized to teach by statute. Teacher leaders and Peer Observers are
      specifically included in this definition even though their duties may include
      evaluation of their peers. Guest teachers and student teachers are not included.

1-3   The term “Specialized Service Provider” (SSP) as used in this Agreement shall
      mean all non-administrative employees, employed half-time or more, who hold a
      professional license in order to practice and are performing duties in the capacity
      of an SSP. SSPs are licensed personnel who provide support to teachers and
      students in areas that involve student physical, emotional, and social health and
      well-being, including but not limited to audiologists, occupational therapists,
      physical therapists, school counselors, school nurses, school orientation and
      mobility specialists, school psychologists, school social workers, and
      speech-language pathologists.

1-4   The term “Board” as used in these Articles shall mean the Board of District No. 1
      in the City and County of Denver and State of Colorado.

1-5   The term “Association” as used in this Agreement shall mean the Denver
      Classroom Teachers Association.

1-6   The terms “School District,” “District” and “Denver Public Schools” as used in
      these Articles shall mean District No. 1 in the City and County of Denver and State
      of Colorado.

1-7   The term “Superintendent” as used in these Articles shall mean the
      Superintendent of Schools of District No. 1 in the City and County of Denver and
      State of Colorado. The Superintendent is the Chief Executive Officer of the Board
      who administers the affairs and programs of the District as provided by law and
      Board policy.

1-8   The term “school year” as used in these Articles shall mean the officially adopted
      traditional school calendar.

1-9   The term “principal” as used in these Articles shall include the head administrator
      of a school, as well as an administrative supervisor, where appropriate.




                                        7 of 137
1-10 The term “school” as used in these Articles shall refer to each educational unit
     overseen by a principal or administrative supervisor.

1-11   The term “ProComp Agreement” as used in these Articles shall refer to the
       Professional Compensation System for Teachers Agreement as it existed on
       January 18, 2019.

1-12 The term “Innovation Schools” and “Innovation Zones (iZone)” refer to an
     individual or group of public innovation schools that share common interests and
     seek additional flexibility which may or may not include waivers to portions of this
     agreement.

1-13   Unless the language provides otherwise, the term “educator” as used in this
       Agreement shall refer to all employees covered by this Agreement.

                                    Article 2 - General

2-1 The District and the Association agree to abide by and enforce the provisions of this
    Agreement in good faith.

2-2 The Board shall apply the provisions of this Agreement equally to all employees
    without discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex/gender
    (including pregnancy, childbirth, and related medical conditions), disability, citizen
    status, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, transgender status,
    marital status, veteran status, age, membership or official activities in any teacher
    organization, or any other rights as may be protected by statute.

2-3 The District and the Association shall collaborate on the creation of a webinar
    regarding the terms of this Agreement and take steps to assure that the webinar is
    available at all times to educators. The webinar shall track who has taken the
    training. The District and the Association may also mutually agree to conduct
    additional training with educators and administrators, as necessary, to ensure the
    implementation and enforcement of the Agreement. The District and the Association
    will also publish this Agreement on their respective websites, along with any MOUs
    or addendums. Hard copies of the Agreement shall be distributed to each
    Association Area Representative and each District/building Administrator.

2-4 No change, rescission, alteration or modification of this Agreement in whole or in
    part shall be valid unless the same is ratified by both the Board and the Association.

       2-4-1 Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, requests for waivers from this
             Agreement shall be made by the principal and the Association
             Representative to the Board of Education and the Association. Practices in
             individual schools that have not followed this procedure are not
             precedent-setting and do not establish a past practice.




                                          8 of 137
2-5 This Agreement shall be governed and construed according to the Constitution and
    Laws of the State of Colorado. If any provision of the Agreement or any application
    of this Agreement to any educator covered hereby is found contrary to law, such
    provision or application shall have effect only to the extent permitted by law, but all
    other provisions or application of this Agreement shall continue in full force and
    effect.

2-6 In case of any direct conflict between the express provisions of this Agreement and
    any Board policy or writing not incorporated in this Agreement, the provisions of this
    Agreement shall control.

2-7 The parties recognize that the Board has the responsibility and authority to establish
    policies and regulations for the management of all the operations and activities of the
    District. All lawful rights and authority of the Board not modified by this Agreement
    are retained by the Board.

2-8 This Agreement constitutes District policy for the term of said Agreement, and the
    Board and the Association will carry out the commitments contained herein and give
    them full force and effect.

2-9 The Association shall continue to admit persons to membership without
    discrimination on the basis of any of the protected classes listed in Article 2-2 or any
    other rights as may be protected by statue.

2-10 Employees covered by this Agreement have the right to join, or refrain from joining,
    any lawful organization for their professional or economic improvement and for the
    advancement of public education. Membership of an educator in, or financial
    support for any organization, shall not be required as a condition of employment with
    the District.

                    Article 3 - Covered Employees and Recognition

3-1 Employees covered by this Agreement include all teachers as defined in Article 1-2 ,
    all SSPs as defined in Article 1-3, Educational Sign Language Interpreters, Associate
    Teachers, CTE ProTech Instructors and JROTC instructors, but excluding vocational
    teachers covered by the Vocational Teachers’ Federation Agreement and Type II
    Authorization Interns.

3-2 Pursuant to current Board resolutions granting recognition, the Board hereby
    reaffirms recognition of the Association and agrees that the Association shall
    continue as the exclusive representative of the employees specified in Article 3-1
    until six months after the expiration of this Agreement and for such additional periods
    of time as its recognition may be extended under procedures approved by the Board.

3-3 All rights and privileges granted to the Association under the terms and provisions of
    this Agreement are for the exclusive use of the Association.



                                          9 of 137
                                Article 4 - Effective Dates

4-1 Upon ratification, this Agreement shall be effective September 1, 2022, and shall
    remain in full force and effect until August 31, 2025.

                                      Article 5 –
                Educator Voice, Joint Activities, and Leadership Teams

5-1 Guiding Principles.

       5-1-1 Implementation of the District’s instructional program is complex and best
             accomplished when there is mutual respect among a school’s leadership
             and teachers with a joint commitment to problem solving. Such an
             atmosphere in no way diminishes the authority of the school leadership or
             the professionalism of educators.

       5-1-2 The Board of Education is vested with the authority to establish the
             District’s curriculum and instructional program.

       5-1-3 For teachers, a variety of relevant and tailored professional growth activities
             is most likely to improve instruction, including individual time for reflection,
             participation in grade level/subject area/vertical teams, whole school
             professional development, working with the educator leaders, and
             participation in professional learning communities. A staff development
             plan shall take into account the differentiated needs of educators based on
             experience, education, skills, and student needs. A variety of activities
             developed in collaboration with educators shall be included in the plan.

       5-1-4 Teamwork among educators and with the school leadership is an important
             component for improving achievement. Educators shall have a significant
             role in identifying, developing, and implementing the instructional program
             consistent with Colorado State Standards and/or Common Core State
             Standards and their professional judgment. Differentiated instructional
             supports may be provided in order to develop foundational skills and bridge
             the gap to grade-level competency.

       5-1-5 A positive school climate is also an important component of improving
             student achievement. A positive school climate is created through a
             collaborative working relationship between school leaders, educators,
             parents, and community members.

5-2 Educator Committees.




                                         10 of 137
      5-2-1 The Superintendent or designee(s) and the Association may mutually agree
      to form teacher committees to address issues of significance that impact teachers’
      salaries, wages, hours, and conditions of employment.

      5-2-2 The following committees have been formed to work toward that end:

         ●   Agreement Review Committee – Articles 6, 7, and 11.
         ●   Advisory District Personnel Performance Evaluation Council – Article 10
         ●   Interim Negotiations – Article 6
         ●   Benefits Board – Articles 21 and 28
         ●   Instructional Issues Council – Article 5
         ●   Collaborative School Committees
         ●   Personnel Committees – Article 13
         ●   School Leadership Teams – Article 5
         ●   Instructional Leadership Teams - Article 5
         ●   LEAP Collaboration Committee – Article 10
         ●   SSP GPS Collaboration Committee - Article 10
         ●   ESS Collaborative Committee - Article 5
         ●   Collaborative Equity Committee - Article 31
         ●   Any additional committees may be formed as needed.

5-3 Instructional Issues Council.

      5-3-1 The District and the Association shall establish a District-wide Instructional
            Issues Council (the Council) to collaborate, review, and problem solve
            through an open and honest dialogue, in order to make recommendations
            by consensus, where appropriate, regarding the planning, implementation
            and ongoing improvement of the District’s existing and proposed
            curriculum, instructional programs, and assessment tools, including
            professional development. The Council shall be co-chaired by an educator,
            appointed by the Association President, and a designee of the
            Superintendent.

      5-3-2 Impact on Student Achievement and Educator Time.

             When considering a recommended course of action, the Council will
             consider the impact of the proposed initiative on the:

             • Estimated potential for improving student achievement; and

             • Educators’ time to teach and work week.

      5-3-3 The Council shall operate based on the guidelines below:

             a. The Council shall have a facilitator, if a source of funding other than the
                District or Association can be identified.



                                        11 of 137
             b. The Council shall be composed of a minimum of 3 and a maximum of 6
                educators appointed by the Association President and a minimum of 3
                and maximum of 6 designees appointed by the Superintendent. Both
                parties shall appoint an equal number of members to the Council.

             c. The Council shall meet when there is a District-wide issue that at least
                one (1) of the co-chairs believes is necessary for the Council’s
                discussion and review. The co-chairs for the Association and the District
                shall provide notice to the Deputy Superintendent and the DCTA
                president when the Council would like to convene and on what topic(s).
                After convening, the Council shall determine by consensus how
                frequently and how long the group needs to meet in order to address
                the issue(s) presented.

             d. Participation on the Council shall take place during time outside of the
                educator work day. This time shall be compensated at the extra duty
                rate.

             e. After coming to consensus on a recommendation, the Council will meet
                with the Deputy Superintendent and DCTA President in order to share
                any recommendations.

5-4 Access to Principal Supervisors. Principal Supervisors will get input from
    school-based educators on issues relevant to their assigned schools such as the
    implementation of the instructional program, school climate, and/or professional
    development. For example, Principal Supervisors can get this input by
    communicating with school-based educators, meeting with schools’ SLTs, by joining
    faculty meetings, and/or by speaking with the Association leadership. Principal
    Supervisors shall meet and confer with Association leadership if requested by the
    Association.

5-5 School Leadership Team.

      5-5-1 Each school will have a School Leadership Team (SLT) consisting of the
            principal, the association representative, an educator appointed by the
            principal, and a minimum of three (3) educator representatives who should
            represent a cross section of the faculty including grade levels, specials,
            department chairs and special service providers. These (SLT) members are
            elected annually by a majority of the faculty voting by secret ballot. The SLT
            will seek to operate in an environment marked by mutual support and
            respect.

      5-5-2 The SLT will strive to make decisions by consensus. A consensus is either
            a unanimous decision or a majority decision that the entire SLT, including
            the dissenters, will support. If consensus cannot be reached, the matter



                                        12 of 137
       shall be referred to the Instructional Superintendent who shall consult with
       the Association prior to making a decision. The Instructional Superintendent
       will review and consider any information provided by members of the SLT.

5-5-3 The SLT will meet regularly and their responsibilities shall include:

          a. Review data and collaborate in the development of the Unified
             Improvement Plans (or future equivalent);

          b. Review and collaborate on the design of the school’s schedule,
             including but not limited to:

              ● student schedule;

              ● school-based educator schedule;

              ● parent teacher conferences;

              ● school-sponsored events;

              ● The design of and schedule for the professional development
                plan within the 40 hour work week, e.g. use of “teal days” or
                equivalent. The SLT shall take into consideration other
                professional development and teacher obligations in scheduling
                this time;

              ● Other operational and professional functions (eg. committee
                meetings, faculty/staff meetings, grade-level meetings, vertical
                team meetings, departmental meetings, planning with
                instructional personnel, data teams); and

              ● Contingency plans for lack of substitute teachers in order to
                assure equitable impact and implementation.

              ● Heat Related Closure or Early Release

                 If the temperature within a school without air conditioning or in
                 which the air conditioning system is not functioning correctly rises
                 to a degree that is unsafe to host in-person classes, principals
                 will consult with their School Leadership Team (SLT) to determine
                 whether conditions would warrant a recommendation for closure,
                 early release or transition to temporary remote operation for a
                 period of time. All schools must follow the District’s Heat
                 Mitigation procedures before moving forward with
                 recommendations and implementation. Prior to making any




                                  13 of 137
                  changes to the Heat Mitigation procedures document, the District
                  will review such changes with DCTA.

                  In the case of school closure, early release or transition to
                  temporary remote operation, a SLT’s recommendation will be
                  approved provided the recommendation is consistent with the
                  District’s Heat Mitigation procedures. Consistent with Article
                  5-5-2, if consensus on the recommendation cannot be reached,
                  the Operational Service Director will consult with the Association
                  prior to making a final recommendation. The heat mitigation
                  procedures do not pertain to emergency school closing within
                  Article 8-11 of collective bargaining agreement.

          c. Review and collaborate on the implementation of the instructional
             program as it specifically applies to classrooms and grades at the
             school including prioritizing and sequencing activities within the
             educator work week;

          d. Collaborate to identify strategies for increasing enrollment at the
             school;

          e. Collaborate to develop communication strategies for regularly
             reporting student progress to parents/families;

          f. Collaborate to implement best instructional practices;

          g. Plan to identify and reduce non-essential work requirements;

          h. Collaborate on the school-wide learning cycles and observation
             cycles for the year;

          i.   Review and approve written proposals from a teacher requesting
               that he/she be permitted to substitute a planned Professional
               Development session with a proposed alternative because the
               planned session is not related to the teacher’s content area (e.g.
               tabletop arrangement PD for the swimming teacher is not reasonably
               related); the SLT shall develop procedures regarding such requests;
               and

          j.   Perform additional duties as outlined in Article 8.

5-5-4 Decisions may be made by the SLT to alter the length of the lunch period
      (Article 8-2) or Secondary Teaching Load (Article 8-5-1) only after
      conducting a confidential vote of the majority of the faculty. Changes will
      not be made to the length of the lunch period or secondary teaching load
      without a positive majority confidential vote of the faculty. Information about



                                   14 of 137
             such changes will be sent to the Principal Supervisor, DCTA representative,
             and the Human Resources Support Partner for tracking purposes.

5-6 Instructional Leadership Team.

      5-6-1 Each school will have an Instructional Leadership Team (ILT)
            consisting of the principal, senior team leads (STL), team leads (TL) and
            other instructional leaders identified as critical to driving the instructional
            vision. The ILT is responsible for focusing on the implementation of the
            school-wide instructional cycle, including but not limited to:

                ●   Drive instructional vision;
                ●   Focus on improving instruction;
                ●   Calibrate on observation, feedback, coaching;
                ●   Professional learning designed in collaboration with the SLT.

             ILT members should represent a cross section of the faculty including
             grade levels, specials, department chairs, and special service providers.

5-7 Department Leadership Team.

      5-7-1 Each department within Exceptional Student Services will have a
            Department Leadership Team (DLT). Departments are defined as:

                ● Low Incidence Disability Educators: Audiologists, Teachers of the
                  Deaf/Hard of Hearing, Educational Sign Language Interpreters,
                  Teachers of the Visually Impaired, Certified Orientation & Mobility
                  Specialists, Educational Braillists.
                ● School Psychologists/School Social Work;
                ● School Occupational Therapy/Physical Therapy;
                ● School Speech-Language Pathology;
                ● School Nursing;
                ● Special Education Teachers: Mild-Moderate, Center-Based, Itinerant
                  Special Education Teachers, Early Childhood Special Educators.

      The Office of Schools will have the following Department Leadership Teams:

                ● The Department of Early Education will have a Department
                  Leadership Team (DLT) for Early Childhood Educators.
                ● The Department of School Counseling will have a Department
                  Leadership Team (DLT) for School Counselors.
                ● The Department of Gifted and Talented will have a Department
                  Leadership Team (DLT) for Gifted/Talented Educators.

      5-7-2 The DLT will be composed of




                                         15 of 137
          ● the functional director and/or manager/supervisor;
          ● the department primary association representative;
          ● an educator appointed by the functional director and/or manager;
            and
          ● a minimum of three (3) representatives elected annually by secret
            ballot vote of the educators in the department.

5-7-3 The DLT will seek to operate in an environment marked by mutual support
      and respect. The DLT will make decisions utilizing a consensus model. A
      consensus decision is either unanimous or a majority decision that the
      entire DLT (including dissenters) will support. In the case that a consensus
      cannot be reached the matter shall be referred to the Executive Director of
      the Exceptional Student Services or designee, who shall consult with the
      Association prior to making a decision.

5-7-4 The role of the DLT will be to:

          ● Collaborate with Exceptional Student Services Leadership around
            identifying best practices of service delivery and addressing
            concerns around implementation of district, state, and federal
            requirements impacting workload in the respective functional area.
          ● Review and collaborate with Exceptional Student Services
            leadership around the processes for hiring, assignment,
            reassignment, transfer, and workload expectations including
            assignments less than five (5) days.
          ● DLTs will work on developing processes for a workload calculator to
            inform the ESS Collaborative Committee in its development of the
            ESS Manual and achieve workload benchmarks.
          ● DLTs may designate sub-committees to complete specialized work
            related to the group’s responsibilities.
          ● Review and collaborate with Exceptional Student Services
            leadership regarding professional development plans for their
            respective functional area.

5-7-5 An Exceptional Student Services Collaborative Committee will meet at
      minimum on a quarterly basis to promote equity and collaboration in
      addressing universal issues impacting SSPs and Special Educators. This
      committee will be composed of ten (10) members. The District will appoint
      up to five (5) members, and DCTA will appoint up to five (5) members.
      Each party will ensure their appointees represent the different
      disciplines.The ESS Collaborative Committee will make decisions utilizing a
      consensus model. A consensus decision is either unanimous or a majority
      decision that the entire ESS Collaborative Committee (including dissenters)
      will support. In the case that a consensus cannot be reached the matter
      shall be referred to the Executive Director of the Exceptional Student




                                 16 of 137
             Services or designee, who shall consult with the Association prior to
             making a decision.

5-8 Any principal, Department Manager, SLT, ILT, or DLT member can request joint
    training conducted by HR and DCTA Staff on SLT/DLT procedures and distributed
    leadership. All new Principals and new Department Managers to the District or in
    their first position as a Principal or Department Manager shall receive training on
    SLT/ILT procedures and distributive leadership and the delineation of roles between
    the SLT, ILT and CSC.

    5-8-1    Any educator member of the CSC, through consensus vote of the CSC,
             can request CSC training provided by the district regarding CSC purpose,
             procedures and the delineation of roles between the SLT, ILT, and CSC.

5-9 The Agreement Review Committee (ARC) has joint membership of the
    Association, including the DCTA Executive Director or designee, Uniserv Directors,
    and members of the Department of Human Resources. Either party may bring
    additional people as needed, with advance notification to the other party. The ARC
    is a forum for raising and reviewing issues associated with implementing the terms
    of this Agreement.

5-10 School Redesigns, Restarts, Consolidation, and School Closures.

      5-10-1 The Superintendent and the Association President shall meet annually in
              the fall after the School Performance Framework is released to discuss
              the schools that may be eligible for redesign, closure, or restart. Timelines
              for decision making and options regarding restart or closure shall be
              discussed.

      5-10-2 A school shall be identified for Redesign based on substandard student
             achievement or substandard growth in student achievement as identified
             in federal or state accountability systems.

      5-10-3 The Restructuring of a school is the alteration of the governance structure
              of the school, as provided in the reauthorization of the Every Student
              Succeeds Act.

      5-10-4 A Program Change is a substantial change to the educational program at
             the school that has been approved by the Board of Education, the CSC, or
             both. Some or all of the teaching positions at a school approved for a
             Program Change may be reposted. If two candidates are equally qualified
             based on the considerations listed in Article 13-8-6 (criteria for Personnel
             Committee to consider), priority shall be given to existing faculty.

      5-10-5 The treatment of personnel in schools subject to redesign, restart,
             consolidation or closure is described in Article 13.



                                        17 of 137
      5-10-6       The Association and the District affirm that:

                       ● many internal and external factors contribute to a school’s
                         success;

                       ● early intervention to improve achievement in a school that
                         may be designated for redesign, restart or closure is in the
                         best interests of the school’s students, teachers, parents,
                         Community and the District; and

                       ● the decision to redesign, restart, consolidate or close a school
                         is not meant to imply blame to any one party.

                   Toward that end, the District will continue to implement its Tiered
                   Support Framework (or a future equivalent), a structure that
                   proactively targets resources for the improvement of school
                   performance.

      5-10-7 Annually, the Superintendent (or designee) and the Association President
             shall meet, review, and provide input on the supports provided via the
             Tiered Support Framework (or its future equivalent).

      5-10-8 Annually, the Superintendent (or designee) and the Association President
             shall meet and review the culture, climate, student achievement and
             parent satisfaction of the redesigned or restarted schools. The information
             gathered will also be shared with the Board of Education in order to help
             inform any future decisions about restart or redesign.

      5-10-9 Prior to the beginning of the school year the District will make available a
             summary of the material changes to the School Performance Framework
             (SPF) and the rationale. When there is a proposed material change to
             the SPF, the District will provide notice to the Association and will respond
             to a request from the Association President for discussions about the
             proposed change.

5-11 Bond and Mill Levy Oversight.

      5-11-1 Going forward, when a Bond or Mill Levy Committee is formed after a
             bond or mill is approved by voters, the Association shall be notified of the
             opportunity to recommend members for appointment by the Board to the
             Committee(s) at least two weeks prior to the closing of the application
             process. If the Association recommends at least three qualified members
             for a Committee and those members apply, the Board shall appoint at
             least one of the Association’s nominations to the Committee.




                                       18 of 137
                            Article 6 - Negotiating Procedure

6-1 During the term of this Agreement, the Agreement may not be reopened except by
    mutual consent of the parties or when permitted by law or this Agreement.

6-2 The Agreement is open for negotiation during the eight months prior to the date the
    Agreement is scheduled to expire. While the Agreement is open, upon request by
    either party, the District and the Association will negotiate as provided in this Article
    6-2.

       6-2-1 Written requests for negotiations between the Board and the Association
             may be submitted on such matters concerning educators’ salaries, wages,
             hours and conditions of employment. All proposals relevant to these issues
             are subject to negotiation. Such requests will specify the subject matter to
             be considered.

       6-2-2 A written response will be made within ten (10) school days of the receipt of
             any such written request.

       6-2-3 Negotiations will be conducted at times and places mutually agreeable to
             the negotiators named by each party; provided, however, that the first
             meeting shall be held within ten (10) school days of such written response,
             unless other arrangements are mutually acceptable.

       6-2-4 The Board and the Association agree to accept and consider
             recommendations from the Community when modifying this Agreement.

       6-2-5 The parties to this Agreement recognize that the public has an interest in
             the negotiations and acknowledge a duty jointly to inform the public of the
             status and progress of negotiations.

       6-2-6 If negotiations are scheduled during the school day, the negotiators shall be
             released from their regular duties with no loss of pay.

       6-2-7 Either party may use the services of outside consultants and may call upon
             professional and lay representatives to assist in the negotiations.

       6-2-8 During negotiations, the Board and the Association will present relevant
             data, exchange points of view, and make proposals and counter-proposals.
             Upon request of either party, the other will make available for inspection its
             records and data pertinent to the subject of negotiations.

       6-2-9 Tentative agreements reached as a result of such negotiations will be
             reduced to writing and will have conditional written approval of both parties
             pending approval of the final Agreement. The final Agreement will be
             signed by the Board and Association. If changes in the tentative



                                          19 of 137
            agreements are necessary as a result of the Board’s budget adoption
            process, the tentative agreement(s) that require(s) amendment will be
            subject to negotiation.

      6-2-10 Such negotiations shall conclude no later than June 15th of the year the
            Agreement is scheduled to expire (or 60 days before expiration if the
            Agreement expires on a date other than August 31 st), unless extended by
            mutual consent. If impasse is reached, the parties shall use the vehicle for
            resolution as provided under Article 6-2-11.

      6-2-11 Impasse Resolution/Mediation.

            6-2-11-1 Either party may declare an impasse. Then a mediator shall be
                     selected with the following procedure. The parties should first
                     make a good faith effort to agree on a mediator. If the parties
                     cannot agree, the mediator shall be selected by the Federal
                     Mediation and Conciliation Services (FMCS), if FMCS agrees to
                     follow the laws of public bargaining. If FMCS does not agree to
                     follow the laws of public bargaining, a mediator shall be selected
                     with the assistance of the American Arbitration Association,
                     according to the procedure of Article 7-3-5-2.

            6-2-11-2 Any mediation efforts must be concluded by August 31, and will
                     be conducted under rules determined by the mediator.

            6-2-11-3 If mediation is unsuccessful and if both parties agree, the
                      mediator may issue a written report to the parties explaining the
                      matters still at issue.

            6-2-11-4 The parties agree to share the cost of mediation equally.

6-3 Financial Agreement Negotiations.

   6-3-1 While it is the intent of the parties that the economic provisions in this
          Agreement shall remain in full force and effect during its term, in order to
          comply with the provisions of the TABOR Amendment and § 22-32-110(5)
          C.R.S., the provisions of the Agreement relating to salaries and benefits may
          be reopened by the District in connection with its annual adoption of its
          budget.

   6-3-2 As of the time they are made available to the Board, the Board will provide the
         Association with a Superintendent’s proposed budget for the next fiscal year,
         as well as available preliminary budgetary information and any proposals
         affecting educators’ salaries, wages, hours and conditions of employment.




                                       20 of 137
    6-3-3 Any agreement reached as a result of these negotiations should be reduced to
          a written Financial Agreement that can be for one-year or multi-year terms.

6-4 Interim Negotiations. This provision is not intended to allow for changing the
    language or the intent of the existing Agreement outside of the normal bargaining
    cycle when the Agreement is open for negotiation. From time to time, however,
    matters arise that the parties may need to address in a timely manner and when
    waiting until the next negotiations period is not practicable. Therefore, during the
    term of this Agreement and between regularly scheduled bargaining sessions, the
    parties may choose to engage in interim negotiations.

    6-4-1 Such negotiations may be initiated by the Association with a request to the
          Superintendent or by the District with a request to the Association President.
          Following a discussion of the purpose of the requested negotiations, the
          Superintendent and Association President will decide if the matter will be
          addressed and what group of individuals will be given the responsibility for
          addressing the matter. There would be no commitment to a particular
          outcome. The matter could be referred to an existing body such as the
          Agreement Review Committee (ARC) or the Instructional Issues Council, or
          the Superintendent and Association President may agree to appoint a special
          committee to address the matter.

    6-4-2 Generally, the matters to be addressed will be those substantive in nature and
          which impact the operation of the District and/or the operation of this
          Agreement.

    6-4-3 If the District and the Association reach agreement on matters that are related
          to the interpretation of the Agreement or matters on which the Agreement is
          silent, the agreements will be memorialized in a Memorandum of
          Understanding, subject to the approval of the Representative Council of the
          Association and the Superintendent. If approved, the Memorandum will be
          binding on both parties but will be reviewed at the next formal bargaining
          session.

    6-4-4 Matters that change existing provisions of the Agreement will be referred to
          the membership of the Association and the Board for ratification.

                            Article 7 - Grievance Procedure

7-1 Definitions.

    7-1-1 A “grievance” shall mean a written complaint by an educator or educators in
          the negotiating unit that there has been a violation, a misinterpretation, or
          inequitable application of any of the provisions of this Agreement or of an
          administrative procedure, practice, or written personnel policy that affects
          educators.



                                        21 of 137
    7-1-2 Grievances regarding a violation, a misrepresentation, or inequitable
          application of this Agreement may go to Level Three, upon the request of the
          Association. Unless provided otherwise in this Agreement, grievances
          regarding administrative procedures, practices and written personnel policies
          that affect educators are grievable up to Level Two.

    7-1-3 The term “grievance” shall not apply to any matter as to which (1) the method
          of review is prescribed by law, (2) the Board is without authority to act, or (3) a
          grievance is specifically prohibited or limited by the terms of this Agreement.
          As an example, the term “grievance” shall not apply to the dismissal of a
          non-probationary teacher, the review of which is prescribed by law.

    7-1-4 An “aggrieved person” is an educator or educators asserting a grievance.

    7-1-5 If, in the judgment of the Association, a grievance
          affects a group of educators in more than one (1) building, the Association
          may submit such grievance in writing directly to the Office of Talent (Human
          Resources), and the processing of such grievance may be commenced at
          Level Two.

7-2 Purpose. The purpose of this grievance procedure is to secure equitable solutions
    at the lowest possible administrative level to problems that may arise. To this end,
    grievance proceedings will be kept informal and confidential and both parties will
    work toward a resolution to avoid litigation.

7-3 Procedure. Since it is important that grievances be processed as rapidly as
    possible, the number of days indicated at each level is a maximum, and every effort
    should be made to expedite the process. The time limits specified may, however, be
    extended by mutual agreement. If a grievance is filed which might not be finally
    resolved at Level Three under the time limits set forth herein prior to the end of the
    school year, the time limits will be reduced so that the grievance procedure will be
    concluded prior to the end of the school year, or as soon thereafter as practicable.

    Information. The Board agrees to make available to the aggrieved person and the
    aggrieved person’s representative, all pertinent information not privileged under law,
    in its possession or control, and which is relevant to the issues raised by the
    grievance. The Association agrees to make available to the Board and its
    representatives, all pertinent information not privileged under law in its possession or
    control, and which is relevant to the issue raised by the grievant.

    Timing. No grievance shall be recognized by the District or the Association unless it
    is presented at Level One within fifteen (15) school days after the aggrieved person
    knew, or should have known, of the act or condition on which the grievance is based.
    However, if the Association determines that a grievance affects a group of educators
    in more than one (1) building, the Association may submit an Association grievance



                                         22 of 137
in writing at Level Two. An Association grievance shall not be recognized at Level
Two unless it is filed with the Department of Human Resources within at least twenty
(20) school days after the act or condition upon which it is based occurred.
Grievances not timely presented will be considered as waived.

7-3-1 Level One. A grievance first will be discussed with the aggrieved person's
      principal or supervisor to attempt to resolve the matter informally, at which
      time the aggrieved person (1) may discuss the grievance personally, (2) may
      be accompanied by the Association's Representative, or (3) may request that
      the Association's Representative act on behalf of the aggrieved person. If the
      Association believes that the principal or immediate supervisor is not best
      suited to resolve the matter informally, the Association may discuss the
      grievance with the Executive Director of Labor and Employee Relations who
      will provide the Association with the individual best suited to resolve the
      matter informally.

      7-3-1-1 If a staff member of the Association accompanies the aggrieved
              person or acts on behalf of the aggrieved person, a Talent (Human
              Resource) representative may attend the Level One meeting. If a
              Talent (Human Resource) member is present the grievant can
              reschedule the meeting in order to have an association staff member
              attend as well. No written documentation of the grievance or
              administrative response will be required if the grievance is settled at
              Level One.

7-3-2 If the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the results of the informal
      conference, the aggrieved person may then file a grievance in writing using
      the Grievance Disposition Form with the principal or supervisor within seven
      (7) school days. The grievance must refer to the specific Articles of the
      Agreement and explain how they were violated and indicate the reason why
      the Level One decision is unsatisfactory. The principal and the grievant shall
      sign the Grievance Disposition Form. The principal shall also have the
      opportunity to provide comments related to the Level One process on the
      Grievance Disposition Form. No additions to this form may be made after it
      has been signed by the grievant and the principal, unless new agreement
      articles, administrative procedures, practices and written personnel policies
      that have been identified after information from the aggrieved party has been
      requested. The principal or supervisor may request an informal conference
      with the grievant to discuss additions to the form. If an additional meeting is
      not requested within three (3) school days, the grievance form shall be
      amended and presented to all parties at the Level Two conference. The
      disposition form must be submitted to the District within ten (10) days of the
      Level One grievance decision. The grievant shall send a copy of the
      Grievance Disposition Form to the Office of Talent (Human Resources) and
      the Association. The Office of Talent (Human Resources) will assign a
      tracking number to the grievance and distribute copies of the Grievance



                                    23 of 137
       Disposition Form to the Principal Supervisor and the UniServ Director. All
       known documentation related to the grievance must be provided prior to the
       Level Two meeting.

7-3-3 Level Two. The Talent (Human Resources) designee or Principal Supervisor
      will go to the school with the appropriate Association Representative and
      meet with the educator and principal or immediate supervisor to attempt to
      facilitate a resolution. Such a meeting will take place within seven (7) school
      days after receipt of the written grievance by the Office of Talent (Human
      Resources). By mutual consent, the parties may conduct the meeting via
      electronic means including, but not limited, video-, virtual-, and
      tele-conferencing. If there is an agreed-upon resolution to the grievance at
      this meeting, the resolution will be documented in writing and signed by both
      parties. The grievance will be closed and no continuation of said grievance
      will be allowed. If no resolution is reached, a District Representative will be
      responsible for providing a Level Two response on the merits of the grievance
      within ten (10) school days from the Level Two meeting. The Level Two
      response will be forwarded to the principal (or immediate supervisor) and to
      the DCTA for dissemination to the grievant.

7-3-4 Upon request by the Association, grievances concerning an administrative
      transfer, Reduction in Building Staff (RIBS) or the recommendation by a
      principal for non-renewal of a probationary teacher shall be subjected to an
      expedited grievance procedure. The Level Two meeting will take place within
      seven (7) school days. Grievances concerning the recommendation by a
      principal for non-renewal of a probationary teacher will not be processed
      beyond Level Two. The Level Two decision must be submitted to the
      Association within ten (10) school days.

7-3-5 Level Three. If the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the disposition of the
      grievance at Level Two, the aggrieved person may request that the
      Association submit the grievance to either arbitration or mediation within ten
      (10) school days of the receipt of the Level Two decision. The Office of Talent
      (Human Resources) will be copied on such request. If the grievant wants to
      proceed with the Level Three and the Association deems the grievance
      meritorious, it may demand arbitration or request mediation within twenty-five
      (25) school days after the receipt of the aggrieved person's request. The
      arbitration demand/mediation request from the Association must be in writing
      and must indicate the reason the Level Two decision is unsatisfactory. The
      District will respond to the request for mediation within seven (7) school days.

      7-3-5-1 Mediation. If the Association and District agree to mediation, a
              mediator shall be selected from a permanent panel of five (5)
              mediators jointly determined by the parties.




                                    24 of 137
         7-3-5-1-1 The mediator panel shall consist of mediators who are
                   skilled in educational issues and shall be from the greater
                   Denver Metropolitan area and shall include, but are not
                   limited to, Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service and
                   other mediation agencies.

         7-3-5-1-2 A panel shall be selected and reviewed annually not later
                   than July 1.

         7-3-5-1-3 Unless otherwise agreed, the mediator shall be assigned
                   based on a rotating system.

        7-3-5-1-4 At the conclusion of the mediation process the parties will
                  implement any action agreed to through the mediation
                  process. If the mediation process is unsuccessful, the
                  Association may demand Arbitration within seven (7) school
                  days of the conclusion of mediation.

7-3-5-2 If the Association demands arbitration and the parties cannot agree on
        the choice of an arbitrator, the Association shall submit a request to
        the American Arbitration Association for a list of seven (7) arbitrators
        skilled in arbitration of educational issues, with a copy to the District.
        Within ten (10) school days of the receipt of a list, representatives of
        the Association and the District shall meet and alternately strike a
        name on the list. The last name remaining shall be appointed
        arbitrator.

         7-3-5-2-1 Upon request by the Association, administrative transfer
                   grievances shall be subject to expedited arbitration. If
                   selected, applicable rules regarding expedited arbitration
                   will be followed.

7-3-5-3 The arbitrator will have authority to hold hearings and make
        procedural rules.

7-3-5-4 All hearings held by the arbitrator shall be in closed sessions and no
        news releases shall be made concerning progress of the hearings.

7-3-5-5 A report will be issued within thirty (30) calendar days after the close
        of the hearing. The arbitrator shall have no power to add to, subtract
        from, disregard, alter, or modify, any of the terms of this Agreement.

7-3-5-6 The arbitrator's report shall be submitted in writing to the Board and
        the Association only, and shall set forth the arbitrator's findings of fact,
        reasoning, conclusions and recommendations on the issues
        submitted. The arbitrator's recommendations shall be consistent with



                               25 of 137
                 law and with the terms of this Agreement. The arbitrator's report shall
                 be advisory only, not binding on the Board or the Association.

         7-3-5-7 Within seven (7) school days, after receiving the report of the
                 arbitrator, the Board’s designee and the Association’s designee will
                 meet to discuss the report and each designee will simultaneously
                 notify the other on whether each intends to recommend to their
                 respective Boards the acceptance or rejection of the Arbitrator’s
                 report. The Association will be given the opportunity to respond in
                 writing to the Board concerning the arbitrator’s recommendation. The
                 Board will review and consider any response by the Association and
                 shall accept or reject the report of the arbitrator not later than thirty
                 (30) calendar days (not counting July) after receipt of the arbitrator's
                 report. No public release may be made until after the next legislative
                 meeting of the Board.

         7-3-5-8 Within five (5) school days after receiving the Board's official action on
                 the arbitrator's report, the Board's designee and the Association's
                 designee will meet to discuss the action of the Board.

         7-3-5-9 The costs for the services of the arbitrator or mediator, including per
                 diem expenses, if any, plus actual and necessary travel and
                 subsistence expenses, shall be shared equally by the District and
                 Association. The party who cancels a scheduled arbitration will pay
                 the full cost of any fees assessed by the arbitrator.

        7-3-5-10 Any party may request an official stenographic record of the testimony
                 at the hearings. The party requesting shall pay the costs. If the other
                 party requests a copy of the record, it shall share the entire cost of
                 making the stenographic record.

        7-3-5-11 In appropriate cases, both parties may agree to follow the expedited
                 rules and procedures of the American Arbitration Association in
                 processing any grievance at Level Three, except that the Arbitrator
                 shall always be chosen pursuant to Article 7-3­5-2.

7-4 Rights of Educators to Representation.

   7-4-1 Neither the District nor any member of the Association shall take reprisals
         affecting the employment status of any educator, any party in interest, any
         Association Representative or any other participant in the grievance
         procedure by reason of such participation.

   7-4-2 All educators who file a grievance shall do so with full knowledge and
         assurance that they will be represented solely by the Association and/or the
         Association's designee(s) at all levels and steps and proceedings of the



                                        26 of 137
           grievance procedure, except that the aggrieved educator may decline
           representation at Level One.

           7-4-2-1 No aggrieved educator may be represented by a representative or
                   officer of any teacher organization other than the Association.

           7-4-2-2 Level One representation will normally be provided by the
                   Association’s building-level Grievance Representative and/or
                   Association Representative.

    7-4-3 When Level Three hearings are held, all witnesses who are District employees
          shall be summoned by the Department of Human Resources. The Association
          and the District will mutually exchange written witness lists at least two (2)
          days in advance of the hearing.

7-5 Miscellaneous. If the time limits for processing a grievance are not met by the
    administrator responding to the grievance, the grievance may be moved to the next
    level at the request of the aggrieved, or upon request of the Association, the
    Superintendent or designee will review with the responding administrator the reason
    why the time limits were not met and any extenuating circumstances therefore. The
    Office of Talent (Human Resources) may take appropriate action on whether to grant
    the grievant’s requested remedy based on its review of the situation.

    7-5-1 All written and printed matters relating to grievances will be filed separately
          from the central office personnel files of the participants.

    7-5-2 Necessary forms for filing, for serving notices, for making appeals, for making
          reports and recommendations and other necessary documents will be jointly
          prepared and distributed by the Office of Talent (Human Resources) and the
          Association.

    7-5-3 In conducting arbitration cases, the Board will present all relevant material so
          that the arbitrator will have complete information upon which to base a
          decision. A copy of any information presented to the arbitrator will be
          provided to the aggrieved person.

    7-5-4 When it is necessary at Level Two or Level Three for a representative(s)
          designated by the Association to attend a meeting or a hearing called by the
          Office of Talent (Human Resources) during the school day, the Office of Talent
          (Human Resources) shall notify the principal of such Association
          Representatives. The representatives will be released without loss of pay for
          such time as their attendance is required at such meeting or hearing. The
          Association will cooperate with the District in minimizing interruption of the
          continuity of classroom instruction by scheduling witnesses and notifying the
          District as far in advance as possible of the need to provide substitutes for
          educators’ release for such hearing.



                                         27 of 137
    7-5-5 The Agreement Review Committee shall monitor the number and types of
          grievances and the length of time such grievances take to be resolved.

                          Article 8 - Professional Standards

8-1 Contract year. The contract year shall be one hundred eighty-six (186) days. If an
    educator is required to extend their contract year and is continuing to do the work
    they performed during the contract year, they shall be paid at their regular scheduled
    rate per day. Regular scheduled rate per day is the educator’s salary divided by the
    number of days in the contract year.

    8-1-1 In addition to the one hundred eighty-six (186) days, newly hired educators
          may be required to attend pre-session orientation meetings and shall be paid
          in accordance with Article 28-2. New educators will be paid for orientation
          meetings on the next practical payday. Educators hired after the orientation
          process will be afforded comparable training opportunities to that offered
          during orientation.

    8-1-2 Professional Learning Days/Parent Conference Day. Educators shall have ten
          and one-half (10.5) professional learning days and one (1) parent conference
          day per school year during non-student contact days. The District may
          schedule professional learning days in full or half-day increments. Non
          student contact days shall include the equivalent of four and one half (4.5) full
          self-directed teacher planning days to be distributed in meaningful increments,
          and three (3) full professional days to be directed by the principal or SSP
          department leader, three (3) centrally-offered professional days, one (1) of
          which will be equity focused, and one (1) parent conference day.

             8-1-2-1 Schools may modify the daily schedule on the parent/teacher
                     conference days to meet the needs of the Community.

             8-1-2-2 The Association is entitled to have a liaison on the District
                     Calendar Committee that determines the District school calendar
                     each year.

             8-1-2-3 The SLT shall create a schedule that provides educators with the
                     time during school hours to grade school/grade level required
                     assessments that require manual educators scoring.

      8-1-3 There is an expectation that educators will attend beyond the contract year
            for professional development determined by the principal or District if:

                 a. the program needs to be scheduled outside the contract year,




                                        28 of 137
                b. no programs with required attendance will be scheduled for the last
                   two weeks of June and the first two weeks of July,

                c. written notice is given ninety (90) days prior to the end of the school
                   year,

                d. the educational reason is sound and the content is relevant,

                e. educators attending are paid in accordance with Article 28,

                f. adequate alternate opportunities to learn the content are provided.

            8-1-3-1 Educators who cannot attend will need to discuss reasons with
                    their school leader or applicable SSP department leader.

            8-1-3-2 Schools may seek a waiver from this Agreement, as in Article
                    2-4-1, if the training cannot be scheduled during the week prior to
                    or after the school year. In such cases attendance would be
                    voluntary.

      8-1-4 Evening Meetings. In addition to the 40 hour work week, each educator
            may be required to attend three (3) evening events approved by the SLT or
            DLT per school year, as part of the contracted time.

      8-1-5 Special Conditions of Employment. Any special conditions regarding the
            assignment of any educator will be reduced to writing and become an
            addendum to the individual’s initial employment contract with the District.

8-2 Forty (40) Hour Work Week. The work week shall be forty (40) hours and shall
    include:

      8-2-1 Lunch Periods. There shall be a minimum standard forty-five (45) minute
            daily lunch prorated by the individual’s full-time equivalency (FTE). Lunch
            shall be duty free.

      8-2-2 The principal or applicable SSP department leader shall have authority to
            permit educators to diverge from the regular school day.

      8-2-3 The District’s scheduled student school contact day will not be extended
            without applying the due process of collective bargaining.

8-3 Self-Directed Planning Time

      8-3-1 For Secondary Educators: Each secondary school educator shall receive a
            minimum of three-hundred-forty-five (345) minutes of self-directed
            instructional planning time per week. Within the



                                       29 of 137
             three-hundred-forty-five-minutes per week, each teacher shall receive a
             minimum of forty (40) minutes of uninterrupted, self-directed instructional
             planning time per day scheduled during the student school contact day. If
             that is not possible, some of the uninterrupted block of forty (40) minutes
             may be scheduled outside the student contact day. Passing periods shall
             not be considered part of the 345 minutes per week. The ten minutes
             before and after the bell will not be counted toward this time unless the
             educator does not have students for the first or last period.

      8-3-2 For Elementary/ECE/K-8 Educators: Each elementary/ECE/K-8 school
            educator shall receive a minimum of three hundred (300) minutes of
            self-directed instructional planning time per week. Within the
            three-hundred-minutes per week, each teacher shall receive a minimum of
            forty (40) minutes of uninterrupted, self-directed instructional planning time
            per day scheduled during the student school contact day. If that is not
            possible, some of the uninterrupted block of forty (40) minutes may be
            scheduled outside the student contact day. Classroom transitions shall not
            be considered part of the 300 minutes per week. The ten minutes before
            and after the bell will not be counted toward this time unless the educator
            does not have students for the first or last period.

      8-3-3 The District recognizes the importance of having time for instructional
            planning. When feasible and appropriate, schools may extend the amount
            of planning time available, especially for elementary/ECE/K-8 school
            educators.

      8-3-4 The parties recognize that in order to maximize student learning, educators
            need an opportunity to participate in meaningful, authentic, collaborative
            planning that enhances instruction and takes into account educators’
            individual pedagogical needs.
      8-3-5 Educators whose annual contract is less than full-time shall have prorated
            instructional planning time according to their contracted rate.
8-4 Multi-School Assignments. When educators are assigned to more than one (1)
    school site, the principals at the schools involved shall collaborate on the scheduling
    of the workdays for those personnel. These educators shall be required to assume
    non-teaching duties only in their home school assignment. Every effort will be made
    to limit the amount of inter-school travel. Such educators shall be notified of any
    change in their schedules as soon as practicable. When school schedules do not
    align, the educator can request that the schools provide the educator with a written
    schedule that outlines the educator’s forty-hour work week, individual planning
    times, professional development, and travel time. The educator will have the right
    to provide input on the development of the written schedule.

8-5 Teaching Loads. The range of teaching loads, number of preparations and number
    of pupil contacts required should provide for effective instruction and meaningful


                                        30 of 137
teacher-student interaction. DPS and the Association agree to work together to seek
increased state funding to decrease class size.

  The principal shall report to the CSC, after the roster verification process, the
  number of students in each class and this will be published in the CSC minutes on
  the school’s website. For the purposes of this section, a “class” shall be defined
  as any general education, including electives and model one classes.

  Upon request, after the roster verification process, the District shall provide the
  Association with the student information management system data regarding class
  enrollment.

  8-5-1 Secondary Teaching Load. Unless altered by the SLT process, the normal
        teaching load for secondary school teachers shall be five (5) teaching
        periods per day, or the equivalent thereof if block scheduling is used. A
        teacher may request to teach a sixth period.

         8-5-1-1 The maximum class size in grades six (6) through twelve (12) shall
                  not exceed thirty-five (35) students. In no case shall a teacher
                  have a total greater than 175 students per day unless an
                  exception is provided for in Article 8-5-1-2.

                  For schools that include both elementary grades (ECE-5) and
                  secondary grades (6-12) whose staffing model differs from the
                  traditional elementary and secondary staffing model, such must
                  be made known to all prospective applicants to the school during
                  the posting and /or interview process.

         8-5-1-2 For music and physical education classes, the SLT may annually
                  set a higher daily class size limit for a single school year or
                  semester after engaging in direct consultation with the affected
                  teacher(s) and department chairperson(s). The criteria to be
                  considered in deciding whether to increase the maximum class
                  size limit must include safety of students and staff, adequacy of
                  the facility and equipment, and the impact on the educational
                  program in those classes. The SLT will specify which courses and
                  sections will have the higher class size limits and the actual
                  maximum number in each. All raised limits will expire at the end
                  of each semester or school year as specified by the SLT. All
                  decisions to increase maximum class size must be made no later
                  than the time that schedules are set for the school each semester.

  8-5-2 Elementary Teaching Load. The Board shall maintain its effort to retain the
        class size reduction which has been achieved in grades 1 and 2. The level
        of staffing to maintain such class size is dependent on availability of
        funding. When it is necessary to have class size exceed twenty-five (25) in



                                   31 of 137
             primary elementary grades (K-3), the Board shall honor teachers’ requests
             for qualified paraprofessional assistance according to the following
             schedule, and in grades four (4) and five (5). When class size exceeds
             twenty-seven (27), the following schedule will apply:

             8-5-2-1 One (1) hour of paraprofessional assistance per day for one (1) to
                     two (2) students over twenty-five (25).

             8-5-2-2 Two (2) hours of paraprofessional assistance per day for three (3)
                     to five (5) students over twenty-five (25).

             8-5-2-3 Three (3) hours of paraprofessional assistance per day for six (6)
                     to seven (7) students over twenty-five (25).

             8-5-2-4 For grades K-5, in no event shall classes exceed thirty-five (35)
                     students, unless the only solution is transferring students to other
                     schools.

             8-5-2-5 For half-day Model 1 classrooms, the maximum class size will be
                     sixteen (16) students, inclusive of no more than six (6) students
                     with IEPs, unless the only solution is transferring students to other
                     schools.

      8-5-3 If a teacher believes that the number of students assigned to that teacher is
            not consistent with sound educational practice, the teacher shall have the
            right, upon written request to the principal, with a copy to the Principal
            Supervisor, to schedule a conference with their principal regarding the
            matter. The principal will respond to the teacher’s concern.

8-6 Department chairpersons in high schools shall be elected by the Department,
    subject to approval by the principal. Unless determined otherwise by the
    Collaborative School Committee (CSC), the term for department chairpersons shall
    be three (3) years. Department chairpersons shall not succeed themselves unless
    approved by the CSC.

     8-6-1 Department chairpersons shall be provided time to fulfill the duties of that
           assignment as determined by the principal after consultation with the CSC.

8-7 Non-Teaching Duties. The District agrees to make every effort to reduce non
    teaching duties that do not best use a teacher’s presence and skills, through the use
    of teacher aides.

    8-7-1 Assignment of teachers to non-teaching duties not done by aides will be
          rotated so that no teachers will have the same assignment for more than four
          (4) consecutive semesters, unless the teacher agrees to such assignment.




                                        32 of 137
          Reassignment to such non-teaching duty can only be after an interim of at
          least two (2) consecutive semesters.

    8-7-2 Special educators’ and specialized service providers’ non-teaching duty time
          will be used solely for implementing the Individuals with Disabilities Education
          Act (IDEA) and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Section 504)
          mandates. In addition, effective SY 2023-2024, special education teachers,
          specialized service providers, and school building 504 Coordinators (who are
          not special education teachers or SSPs) will have up to four (4) school days
          per semester of release time to work on IDEA and Section 504 compliance
          mandates. The release time can be taken in half or whole day increments.
          Specialized Service Providers and Special Education Teachers with multiple
          school assignments shall collaborate with the principals at the schools
          involved and team leads on scheduling release days.

    8-7-3 Non-teaching duty time shall not reduce self-directed planning time as
          guaranteed in other sections of this Agreement.

    8-7-4 Starting in the 2022-2023 school year, DPS and DCTA agreed to eliminate the
          HPI incentive. $2,785,000 from the former HPI budget will be reallocated to
          create a centrally managed Specialized Service Provider and Special
          Education Pool of educators that will be utilized to support SSP and Special
          Education educators within the district in order to meet student identified IEP
          needs. Consistent with 5-7-5, the ESS Collaborative Committee shall
          determine the hiring, makeup, changes to makeup, assignment, transfer,
          reduction and workload expectations protocols of this centrally managed pool.

8-8 Lesson Plans. Teachers will maintain effective lesson plans related to the approved
    curriculum for use by the teacher in regular instruction and review by the
    administration, as well as specific, detailed lesson plans for use by substitute
    teachers.

    8-8-1 Teachers and school leaders will discuss and agree upon the format of
          lesson plans.

    8-8-2 The administrator can ask for lesson plans to be turned in for the purpose of
          improving instruction and will provide constructive and specific feedback to
          the teacher submitting the plans.

    8-8-3 If the administrator has questions of the teacher regarding the lesson plan,
          then the administrator and the teacher will discuss the lesson plan and
          identify any next steps as necessary, which could potentially include
          coaching and/or professional development.

    8-8-4 A teacher will only be responsible for lesson plans for the first five (5) days of
          any absence.



                                        33 of 137
8-9 Classroom Interruptions. The District agrees that classroom interruptions diminish
    the time for instruction. The administrative staff and educators shall make every
    effort to avoid unnecessary interruptions during instructional periods.

8-10 Class Coverage. It is an administrative responsibility to cover all scheduled
     classes.

      8-10-1 During the first month of each school year, the SLT, in consultation with the
            department chairs at the secondary level or grade level chairs at the
            elementary level, shall develop a written contingency plan for class
            coverage occasioned by a shortfall of substitute teachers. Individuals must
            possess the appropriate teaching credentials to be considered for class
            coverage. Such plan shall include the procedure for enabling teachers to
            invoke Article 28-6.

      8-10-2 STL/TLs should not be solely relied upon for class coverage when there is
            a shortage of substitutes in a building. Contingency plans for lack of
            substitute teachers should prioritize the equitable impact and
            implementation of coaching and observation feedback cycles.

8-11 Emergency School Closings.

     8-11-1 When weather conditions constitute a danger sufficient to require the
            closing of schools, the following procedure shall be followed:

             a. If the conditions exist prior to the normal school opening time, educators
                shall be notified, as early as possible, by public media or direct contact
                and shall not be required to report to work.

             b. If the conditions require closing during the school day, educators shall
                be dismissed as soon as possible after students are dismissed.

     8-11-2 When weather conditions are such that schools will be open, but some
            professional staff or students are not able to attend because of the severity
            of conditions in their locale, the following procedure shall be followed:

             a. As soon as possible, educators affected shall notify the principal of their
                inability to attend school that day.

             b. Professional staff who cannot attend school because of weather
                conditions or other emergencies will have deducted from their personal
                leave, if available, or sick leave if personal leave is not available, the
                day or days they were unable to attend their assignment. All educator
                absences under this Article are subject to review by the school building
                level administrator.



                                        34 of 137
8-12 Teacher-in-Charge. If a teacher is placed in charge of a building during the
     absence of the principal, and when the principal’s absence will be one-half day or
     longer, the teacher will be relieved from either the office or classroom assignment.

8-13 Transportation of Students. Educators shall not be required to transport pupils to
     activities, which take place away from the school building.

8-14 The Instructional Issues Council is charged with developing potential strategies to
     address issues raised in this Article. Annually, the Instructional Issues Council shall
     review district-wide class size data with the goal of developing strategies to
     address class size concerns.

8-15 Exceptional Student Service Workload.

       8-15-1 The Exceptional Student Services Collaborative Committee
             (“ESS Collaborative Committee”) will develop an annual Exceptional
             Student Services Guidance Manual (“ESS Manual”) to outline workload
             considerations for special education teachers and for each SSP discipline,
             informed by each Department Leadership Team. The ESS Manual will
             outline processes for accountability, including how to address workload
             audits for individual educators. The purpose of this ESS Manual is to
             develop a consistent process to help determine recommended workload
             benchmarks across the district and individual schools.

       8-15-2 In order to support a fair and consistent process across
             departments, the ESS Collaborative Committee will adopt a workload
             calculator with common data points across all SSP disciplines and Special
             Education Teachers, and yet have flexibility to consider the unique aspects
             of each discipline. Some of the data points may include, but are not limited
             to: Colorado and/or Metro Denver district trends for ratios, nationally
             recommended caseload ratios by discipline, direct service minutes, indirect
             service minutes, management of IEP/504s, number of initial evaluations
             and reevaluations, travel time in between schools when assigned to
             multiple locations, and other supports required to provide students with
             their necessary services [including a Free Appropriate Public Education
             (FAPE)]. The process and recommendations of workload benchmarks will
             be determined through a consensus process. If the ESS Collaborative
             Committee is unable to reach a consensus, the Executive Director of the
             Exceptional Student Services Office will consult with the Association prior
             to making the final decision.

       8-15-3 The workload benchmarks in the ESS manual will be
              used to inform resources allocated through the school budgeting
              processes, including measures for accountability, each spring for the
              upcoming school year, and will be complete in time to be implemented in



                                         35 of 137
              the budget process for the 2023-2024 school year for Speech Language
              Pathologists, Occupational Therapists and Physical Therapists, and
              Psychologists and Social Workers. The ESS Collaborative Committee will
              then determine the appropriate timelines to ensure that workload
              benchmarks for all SSP disciplines and Special Education Teachers are
              represented in the ESS Manual by the end of the 2024-2025 school year.

       8-15-4 The District and Association recognize the need for
              ongoing evaluation of these recommendations and the development of
              monitoring and evaluation processes. To that end, the ESS Collaborative
              Committee will meet annually for the next three years to review these
              guidelines and budget cycle allocations, and make necessary
              recommendations for changes, including changes available for appropriate
              determinations in response to any requests for workload review.

                        Article 9 - Central Office Educator Files

All educator permanent central office files shall be maintained under the following
conditions:

9-1 All materials placed in the permanent central office file and originating within the
    District shall, upon request, be available to the educator for inspection in no more
    than seventy-two (72) hours. In cases where teachers express a pressing need to
    see their personnel file immediately, the District will make every effort to meet the
    educator’s request. At the educator’s request, anyone may be present in this review.
    If requested, educators may be provided copies of material contained in their central
    office file without cost.

9-2 Material originating within the District and which is disciplinary in nature or negative
    in regard to an educator’s conduct, service, character or personality, shall not be
    placed in an educator’s file unless the educator has had an opportunity to read the
    material and to sign the copy to be filed. Such a signature does not indicate
    agreement with the content of the material.

    9-2-1 If an educator is exonerated with respect to any of the matters cited above or
          is exonerated following the completion of an investigation during which the
          educator was placed on administrative leave with pay, all adverse entries in
          the educator’s central personnel file related to that incident or issue will be
          removed.

    9-2-2 To the extent permitted by the Colorado Open Records Act, completed verbal
          or written reference checks for school-based and centrally hired educators
          who receive a contingent offer to fill a position, whether verbally or in writing,
          shall be available to candidates upon request whether or not they are
          ultimately chosen for the position.




                                         36 of 137
9-3 The educator shall have the right to answer any material filed and have the answer
    reviewed by the Executive Director of Talent (Human Resources), and attached to
    the file copy.

9-4 Written material sent to the central office by students or parents shall be sent to the
    principal for appropriate response and shall not be placed in the central file except
    pursuant to the provisions of this Article.

9-5 Upon written request by the educator, material contained in the central office file for
    more than three (3) years will be reviewed and eliminated, as long as such material
    does not interfere with the safety, physical, and mental health of children. The District
    shall have the exclusive responsibility to determine whether the material should be
    retained.

9-6 All written and printed material dealing with the processing of a grievance will be
    filed separately from the central office personnel files of the participants.

9-7 A log will be kept in the Office of Talent (Human Resources), which must be signed
    and dated by any person examining the file, except for central office personnel.

9-8 All materials contained in local school files kept by principals must be forwarded to
    the permanent central office file in accordance with the conditions of this Article
    before its use in any central office action that affects an educator’s employment
    status, promotion, demotion, or dismissal.

                          Article 10 - Performance Evaluations

Table of Contents:

   ●   Part 1: General
   ●   Part 2: Annual LEAP Evaluations
   ●   Part 3: Advisory Personnel Performance Evaluation Council
   ●   Part 4: Performance Improvement Process
   ●   Part 5: Redress, Grievances, and Appeals
   ●   Part 6: LEAP and SSP GPS Collaboration Committee
   ●   Part 7: Miscellaneous Items

                                      Part 1: General

10-1 Purpose of Evaluation: Performance evaluations are used to:

          1. Provide a common language around expectations and responsibilities.

          2. Assess the effectiveness of educator performance and provide feedback in
             order to drive continuous improvement to instruction and enable educators
             to develop as professionals.



                                         37 of 137
         3. Serve as a measurement of professional growth and development of
            educators over time.

         4. Enhance the implementation of the school’s curriculum.

         5. Implement District and school goals in the classroom.

         6. Measure the level of effectiveness for all educators.

         7. Serve as documentation for a recommendation for dismissal based on
            unsatisfactory performance.

10-2 Definition of Terms

     10-2-1 “Teacher” as used in this Article shall refer to all personnel who are
            evaluated under the District’s growth and performance system for teachers,
            Leading Effective Academic Practice or LEAP.

     10-2-2 “Evaluation” is the annual growth and performance process that culminates
            in the End-of-Year Rating and LEAP End-of-Year Report.

     10-2-3 “Fairness Guide – Evaluation Expectations and Rights for Educators” is a
            resource guide for educators that builds on the foundation of this Article 10
            by describing the entire evaluation process that educators can expect to
            experience for that year and the rights that educators have to raise and
            seek review of concerns associated with the evaluation process.

     10-2-4 “Mid-Year” is a formal reflection conversation between the educator and the
            Evaluator during the evaluation cycle.

     10-2-5 “End-of-Year Rating” is the overall summative rating that combines the
            components of the Evaluation. There are four performance categories:
            Distinguished, Effective, Approaching, and Not Meeting.

     10-2-6 “LEAP End-of-Year Report” includes the Teacher’s LEAP End-of-Year
            Rating, the evidence on which the rating is based, and the other
            requirements set forth in Article 10-3-3.

     10-2-7 “Evaluators” include the Principal, Assistant Principal(s), Teacher Leaders,
            Team Leads or other individuals designated by the District (e.g. Peer
            Observers) to conduct observations in the Evaluation and/or Performance
            Improvement Process. LEAP Evaluators must be certified under the
            District’s certification system to conduct observations.




                                       38 of 137
10-2-8 “Effective Rating” means an overall End-of-Year Rating of Distinguished or
       Effective.

10-2-9 “Ineffective Rating” means an overall End-of-Year Rating of Not Meeting or
       Approaching.

10-2-10 “Appellant” shall mean the person who is appealing a second consecutive
         Ineffective Rating.

10-2-11 “Formal Scored Observation” is an observation of four (4) to six (6)
         indicators.

10-2-12 “LEAP Framework” refers to the District’s evaluation rubric with indicators
         that are used for scoring a classroom observation.

10-2-13 “Score” refers to a rating on an indicator in the Evaluation Framework.

         Definitions for Part 4: The Performance Improvement Process

10-2-14 “Performance Improvement Process” covers the period during which a
        Teacher is considered for a Performance Improvement Plan (“Plan” or
        “PIP”) as well as any time the Teacher is on a Plan.

10-2-15 “Eligibility Observation” is the first step in the Performance Improvement
        Process. The Evaluator conducts one Full Observation of 12 indicators
        and if, during which the Evaluator is required to score all the indicators
        on the LEAP Framework. If those scores meet the Eligibility Criteria, the
        Evaluator can move forward with the Data Gathering Period.

10-2-16 “Eligibility Criteria” are the scores from the Eligibility Observation that
        would permit an Evaluator to move forward with the Data Gathering
        Period.

10-2-17 “Data Gathering Period” is a period of time where data is gathered to
        determine if a Teacher will be placed on a Performance Improvement
        Plan.

10-2-18 “Peer Observers” are current or future teacher positions created by the
        District that provide support to Teachers through classroom observation
        and feedback during the Performance Improvement Process. All Peer
        Observers must be certified under the District’s certification system to
        conduct observations.

10-2-19 “Joint Observation” is a Full Observation that is conducted jointly by the
        assigned Evaluator and the Peer Observer. This takes place during the
        Data Gathering Period.


                                   39 of 137
      10-2-20 “Targeted Plan Observation” is a Full Observation where only the
              indicators identified in the Performance Improvement Plan are scored as
              a method to monitor progress throughout the Plan.

      10-2-21 “Full Observation” is an observation during which the evaluator is
              required to score all 12 indicators on the LEAP Framework.

                           Part 2: Annual LEAP Evaluations

10-3 The District is committed to recruiting, growing, and retaining effective teachers,
     closing opportunity gaps, and preparing all DPS students for college and careers.
     The Teacher growth and performance system is used to drive the growth and
     development of teachers as well as evaluate them against common expectations.
     The following procedures are intended to ensure that the Evaluation is
     growth-based, fair, reliable, and transparent.

     10-3-1 Orientation: At the beginning of each school year, Teachers will receive a
            copy of the LEAP Handbook (hard copy or electronic), which will provide
            extensive details regarding the purpose and nature of the LEAP Evaluation
            process, the elements of the LEAP Evaluation, the procedures for
            conducting the LEAP Evaluation, and the responsibilities of the individuals
            involved.

      10-3-2 Frequency of Evaluation and Procedures for Observations:

              10-3-2-1 Teachers will be evaluated every year.

              10-3-2-2 All Teachers shall receive a minimum of three Formal scored
                       observations each year as defined and set forth in the LEAP
                       Fairness Guide.

              10-3-2-3 All Evaluators must complete bias and culturally responsive
                       training and be certified under the District’s certification system
                       to conduct observations before that Evaluator’s observation
                       scores can be considered when calculating the Teacher’s LEAP
                       End-of-Year rating. Such certification is intended to enable the
                       Evaluator to fairly, professionally, and credibly evaluate
                       Teachers.

              10-3-2-4 Teachers not currently in the Performance Improvement Process
                       will not receive a scored observation during the first two weeks
                       of the school year.

              10-3-2-5 Teachers not currently in the Performance Improvement Process
                       will not receive more than one Formal Scored Observation
                       during a school week.


                                        40 of 137
       10-3-2-6 For a Formal Scored Observation, the Evaluator will complete a
                form that includes both teacher and student evidence and the
                scores for the indicators that the Evaluator scored on the LEAP
                Framework.

      10-3-2-7 Observations can take place at any point during a Teacher’s
               instructional time. However, Evaluators cannot score an
               observation if the Evaluator determines that there was a
               significant disruption to the lesson time period (for example:
               testing of significant duration, guest speakers, fire drill).

      10-3-2-8 After a Formal Scored Observation, the Teacher will not receive
               an additional scored observation until feedback on the prior
               Formal Scored Observation has been provided.

      10-3-2-9 Any teacher may request a coaching cycle following a Formal
               Scored Observation on specific scored indicators as defined and
               set forth in the LEAP Fairness Guide.

10-3-3 LEAP End-of-Year Report: Every year, Teachers will receive an
       End-of-Year Report (“Report”).

       10-3-3-1 Consistent with state law, the Report shall:

                           ● specifically identify when the classroom
                             observations were conducted;

                           ● state the Teacher’s strengths and areas for
                             potential future growth;

                           ● include a plan and/or next steps for improvement;

                           ● identify the data used to support the overall rating;
                             and

                           ● be signed by the evaluator. Beginning in the
                             2023-2024 school year, the evaluation will be
                             signed by the evaluator and the evaluator’s
                             supervisor.

       10-3-3-2 The Teacher is asked to electronically sign the Report. However,
                the Teacher can choose electronically to (i) acknowledge and
                sign, (ii) select the option of “refusing to sign,” or (iii) not sign.
                Signature will not be construed to indicate agreement with the
                information or the conclusions in the final written evaluation.




                                 41 of 137
             10-3-3-3 The Evaluator will share a draft copy of the Report with the
                      Teacher prior to the LEAP End-of-Year conference.

      10-3-4 LEAP End-of-Year Conference:

             10-3-4-1 Prior to the finalization of the LEAP Evaluation, the Evaluator will
                      meet and discuss the LEAP End-of-Year Report with the
                      Teacher at a LEAP End-of-Year conference. This conference is
                      an opportunity for Teachers and Evaluators to do a final
                      assessment of the data gathered regarding the Teacher’s
                      progress and performance for the school year.

10-4 LEAP/SSP GPS Fairness Guide: In addition to the requirements set forth in this
     Article 10, LEAP and SSP GPS Evaluations shall follow the requirements set forth
     in their respective Fairness Guides.

      10-4-1 The LEAP and SSP GPS Fairness Guide will be released each year and
             made available to teachers at the beginning of the year. It will provide a
             detailed description of the entire evaluation process and is intended to
             make the process transparent so that educators know what to expect for
             that year.

      10-4-2 The District is committed to the continuous improvement of its growth and
             performance system for educators. Educators are encouraged to
             participate in any District’s survey regarding the LEAP and SSP GPS
             Evaluations in order to provide feedback on potential improvements to the
             process. The District will share the results regarding LEAP and SSP GPS
             with the LCC and SSP GPS collaborative committee, respectively.

      10-4-3 Absent mutual agreement between the District and the Association, the
             LEAP Fairness Guide cannot change any of the requirements set forth in
             this Article 10.

      10-4-4 A failure to follow any of the requirements in the LEAP and SSP GPS
             Fairness Guide is grievable up to Level 2, but not Level 3.

      10-4-5 The LEAP Collaborative Committee and SSP GPS Collaborative
             Committee (“Committees”) will be responsible for reviewing and revising
             their respective Fairness Guide.

             10-4-5-1 The Committees may designate a subcommittee
                      consisting of an equal number of DPS and DCTA
                      representatives, to review and revise the Fairness Guide.




                                       42 of 137
              10-4-5-2 The Committees will provide a quorum for necessary revisions
                       that need to be made to the Fairness Guide outside of the
                       educator contract year.

  PART 3: THE ADVISORY PERSONNEL PERFORMANCE EVALUATION COUNCIL

10-5 This District shall have an Advisory District Personnel Performance Evaluation
     Council (“the Council”).

     10-5-1 The composition and selection of the Council membership will meet the
             minimum requirements of statute and these members shall be appointed
             by the Board.

     10-5-2 The role of the Council is to conduct a continuous evaluation of the
             District’s Teacher evaluation system and to act as an advisory body to the
             Superintendent and the LEAP Collaboration Committee on ensuring the
             fairness, effectiveness, credibility, and professional quality of the District’s
             Teacher evaluation system.

             PART 4: THE PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT PROCESS

10-6 Performance Improvement Process.

      10-6-1 Overview of the Performance Improvement Process “the Process”: The
             Process begins with the Eligibility Observation. If, during the Eligibility
             Observation, the Teacher meets the Eligibility Criteria, the Evaluator can
             move forward with the Data Gathering Period. During the Data Gathering
             Period, the Evaluator gathers and reviews data in order to determine if the
             Teacher should be placed on a Performance Improvement Plan. As a part
             of this period, a Joint Observation with the Evaluator and a Peer Observer
             is conducted. If the Evaluator decides that significant performance
             concerns exist, the Evaluator can place the Teacher on a Performance
             Improvement Plan (“the Plan”). The Plan will set expectations for
             necessary growth and include the supports that will be provided to the
             Teacher during the Plan. During the Plan, which can last between 30 and
             90 school days, the Teacher is observed by the Evaluator and the
             assigned Peer Observer and the designated supports are provided. At the
             conclusion of the Plan, the Evaluator determines whether the Teacher has
             met the expectations of the Plan and whether the Teacher should be
             recommended for retention or dismissal.

      10-6-2 Data Gathering Period

              10-6-2-1 A Teacher is eligible for the Data Gathering Period when an
                       Evaluator conducts one Full Observation and the scores meet
                       the Eligibility Criteria. Alternatively, a Teacher is eligible for the


                                         43 of 137
                Data Gathering Period when the Teacher has received two
                consecutive Ineffective Ratings.

     10-6-2-2 The Eligibility Criteria are set at:

               The mean score from any of the expectations on the LEAP
               Framework is 2.5 or below (e.g. the mean of all the indicator
               scores in Masterful Content Delivery is 2.5 or below), and/or

               A Teacher scores a Not Meeting (1 or 2) on three or more
               indicators on the LEAP Framework.

     10-6-2-3 If the Eligibility Criteria are met, the Evaluator will notify the
               Teacher that the Teacher is being placed in the Data Gathering
               Period and that there is a possibility that the Teacher will be
               placed on a Performance Improvement Plan.

     10-6-2-4 The District assigns a Peer Observer to participate in the Data
              Gathering Period.

     10-6-2-5 The Evaluator and the Peer Observer conduct a Joint
              Observation of the Teacher’s class.

     10-6-2-6 After the Joint Observation, the Evaluator and Peer Observer will
              consult regarding the lesson observed and the Evaluator will
              consider the data of the Peer Observer.

10-6-3 Decision to Place Teacher on a Performance Improvement Plan

       10-6-3-1 Before placing a Teacher on a Performance Improvement Plan,
               the Evaluator should consider a body of evidence to determine
               whether significant performance concerns exist. The extent and
               types of evidence considered in the body of evidence include the
               data from the Joint Observation and any of the following items:

                   ● LEAP Framework scores from other observations
                     completed;

                   ● Student Perception Survey data;

                   ● Disciplinary referrals data;

                   ● Student Outcomes data;

                   ● Data from the Professionalism domain of the LEAP
                     Framework;


                                 44 of 137
                   ● Evidence provided by the Teacher to demonstrate
                     effectiveness;

                   ● Any other information that is relevant to the determination
                     of whether significant performance concerns exist.

       10-6-3-2 If the Evaluator determines that there is evidence of significant
                 performance concerns, the Evaluator may place the Teacher on
                 a Performance Improvement Plan. If the Evaluator is not the
                 Principal, the Evaluator will make this decision in consultation
                 with the Principal.

       10-6-3-3 Professionalism Plan: The Evaluator can also place the Teacher
                on a Performance Improvement Plan for Professionalism if the
                Teacher received two Not Meeting indicator scores in the
                Professionalism Domain on the Teacher’s LEAP End-of-Year
                Report or LEAP Mid-Year. Because the Professionalism
                indicators measure out-of-classroom work, a Professionalism
                Plan does not require classroom observations. If the Teacher
                still has two Not Meeting scores in the Professionalism Domain
                on the subsequent LEAP Mid-Year Evaluation or LEAP
                End-of-Year Report (whichever occurs first), the Evaluator can
                proceed to the steps outlined in Article 10-6-6.

10-6-4 Development of Performance Improvement Plan (“the Plan”)

       10-6-4-1 The Plan shall be developed by the Principal (or designee) in
                collaboration with the Peer Observer and the teacher.

10-6-5 Requirements of the Performance Improvement Plan

       10-6-5-1 The Plan shall last a minimum of thirty (30) school days and a
                maximum of ninety (90) school days.

       10-6-5-2 The Plan shall require a minimum of two Targeted Plan
                Observations by Evaluator(s) and two Targeted Plan
                Observations by the Peer Observer. All Targeted Plan
                Observations will be announced the Thursday prior to the
                observation week. After each observation during the Plan, the
                Evaluator or Peer Observer should provide the Teacher with
                feedback on the observation.

       10-6-5-3 The Plan shall identify a minimum of three (3) and a maximum
                of five (5) LEAP Framework indicators that will be targeted for
                improvement during the Plan.


                                45 of 137
       10-6-5-4 For each indicator identified, the Plan shall set expectations for
                improvement.

       10-6-5-5 If the Teacher does not meet all the expectations of the Plan,
                the Teacher may be recommended for dismissal for
                unsatisfactory performance. The Plan shall inform the Teacher
                about this standard.

       10-6-5-6 The Plan shall include the supports available to the Teacher
                during the Plan process. The supports can be provided by
                School Leaders, Peer Observers, Teacher Leaders, peers, or
                other appropriate resources.

       10-6-5-7 The Teacher shall not be videoed as part of the evaluation
                process unless the Teacher consented.

       10-6-5-8 If the Teacher goes on an extended leave during the period of
                the Plan, the days on the Plan completed prior to leave will be
                counted and the Plan will continue upon the return of the
                Teacher to active service.

       10-6-5-9 If the Teacher received a Not Meeting rating on any
                Professionalism indicators in the LEAP End-of-Year Report or
                LEAP Mid-Year evaluation in the year prior to the initiation of the
                Plan, the Plan can include expectations regarding that
                Professionalism indicator.

10-6-6 Conclusion of the Performance Improvement Plan

      10-6-6-1 At the conclusion of the initial period set for the Plan, the
               Evaluator shall decide whether or not the Plan will be extended.

      10-6-6-2 The Evaluator may choose to extend the Plan, but the total
               duration of the Plan should not exceed ninety (90) total school
               days.

      10-6-6-3 If the Plan is not extended, the Evaluator shall determine
                whether the Teacher has met the expectations of the Plan and
                whether the Teacher should be recommended for retention or
                dismissal. If the Evaluator is not the Principal, the Evaluator
                shall make this determination in consultation with the Principal.

      10-6-6-4 The Evaluator will consider all evidence provided by the Teacher
               prior to the conclusion of the Plan.




                                46 of 137
             10-6-6-5 The Teacher shall be provided with a final Performance
                      Improvement Plan report.

             10-6-6-6 The report will be presented to the Teacher. The Teacher, Peer
                      Observer and the Evaluator shall sign the report. The
                      Evaluator’s supervisor should also sign the report.

             10-6-6-7 If the Teacher is recommended for retention, the Teacher shall
                       continue to be evaluated under LEAP and will receive a LEAP
                       End-of-Year Report.

          10-6-6-8 If the Teacher is recommended for dismissal, the Teacher shall still
                        receive a LEAP End-of-Year Report if there is sufficient data to
                        calculate a rating.

                 PART 5: REDRESS, GRIEVANCES, AND APPEALS

10-7 A failure to follow any procedure during the LEAP Evaluation can be addressed
     through a grievance.

     10-7-1 Grievances regarding the LEAP Evaluation must be filed and processed in
            accordance with Article 7. However, the District shall ensure that such
            grievances are heard by an individual trained on LEAP.

10-8 The manner to seek review of a LEAP End-of-Year Rating is through the redress
     and/or appeals process.

10-9 Redress.

     10-9-1 In accordance with procedures established by the District, a Teacher can
            access the redress process if:

             ● They believe there has been a computational error in the way the rating
               was determined; and/or

             ● They believe that the evaluator’s assignment of the Professional
               Practice rating from a decision band was not reasonable in light of the
               body of evidence and that assignment had a material impact on the
               overall final rating; and/or

             ● They believe that the evaluator’s assignment of a final rating within a
               decision box was not reasonable in light of the body of evidence.

             ● Both parties agree with the goal that decision bands and boxes will be
               removed from the evaluation process by the 2023-2024 school year.




                                       47 of 137
     10-9-2 Teachers will have the opportunity to engage in two levels of redress
             review.

            10-9-2-1 Level One – The District will identify an individual trained in LEAP
                     to oversee Level One of the redress review. The individual shall
                     have prior experience with the District’s teacher growth and
                     performance systems. The individual will receive annual training
                     on LEAP and their role in the redress process. The individual will
                     facilitate a conversation between the Teacher and the appropriate
                     school leader(s) in an attempt to reach a mutually agreeable
                     resolution. The individual will listen, ask questions, and review the
                     evidence presented and will provide a recommendation and
                     considerations on the outcome to the school leader.

            10-9-2-2 Level Two – If the Teacher is not satisfied with the resolution at
                     Level One, she/he may submit a request for review to the Chief
                     Human Resources Officer (CHRO) or designee.

            10-9-2-3 The current redress process shall be used until such a time that
                     the LEAP Collaboration Committee establishes an alternate
                     redress process.

10-10 Appeal of a Second Consecutive Ineffective LEAP End-of-Year Rating.

      10-10-1 Timelines

               10-10-1-1 The District will notify teachers at risk of loss of
                        non-probationary status in September of every year and
                        provide information about the process and resources available.

               10-10-1-2 A Notice of Appeal must be filed within 15 calendar days
                         following the last student contact day of the academic year in
                         which the second Ineffective Rating was received by the
                         Appellant.

               10-10-1-3 All appeals must be concluded within 90 calendar days after
                         the last student contact day of the academic year calendar in
                         which the second Ineffective Rating is received. If the
                         Appellant has requested DCTA assistance, no Panel hearing
                         will be scheduled during the two weeks the DCTA offices are
                         closed.

              10-10-1-4 The timelines can be extended by mutual agreement of the
                         District and the Teacher.




                                       48 of 137
10-10-2 Grounds for Appeal: Pursuant to the State Board of Education rules at 1
        CCR 301-87, the grounds for appeal shall be limited to the following:

         10-10-2-1 The evaluator did not follow evaluation procedures that
                   adhere to the requirements of statute or rule and that failure
                   had a material impact on the second consecutive Ineffective
                   Rating that was assigned (e.g. an observation was never
                   completed).

         10-10-2-2 The data relied on to determine the second consecutive
                   Ineffective Rating was inaccurately attributed to the Teacher
                   (e.g., data included in the evaluation was from students for
                   whom the Teacher was not responsible).

10-10-3 Procedures

         10-10-3-1 The Appellant or their chosen representative must file a timely
                   Notice of Appeal with the appropriate office or department
                   designated and published by the District. In order to support a
                   transparent process, the Appellant may request the CHRO or
                   designee to conduct a review of how the Appellant’s LEAP
                   score was calculated. The CHRO designee will meet with the
                   Appellant to provide information on how the multiple
                   measures come together to create the Appellant’s LEAP
                   rating.

         10-10-3-2 The Notice of Appeal will contain all the written grounds for
                   the Appeal.

         10-10-3-3 The appropriate official or department designated by the
                   District will convene the Appeals Hearing Panel and set the
                   hearing date according to the terms of this Article.

         10-10-3-4 The District and the Association shall develop appropriate
                   timelines for when the following will occur:

                     10-10-3-4-1 The Appellant shall provide a copy of any
                                 evidence intended to support the Appeal prior to
                                 the hearing. The District shall make additional
                                 copies for panel members as needed.

                     10-10-3-4-2 The Appellant may request evidence from the
                                 District and the District shall provide the
                                 requested evidence if, in the District’s discretion,
                                 the request is reasonably related to a permitted
                                 ground for appeal.


                                  49 of 137
                   10-10-3-4-4 Any documents and/or proceedings related to
                               the appeal process shall not be disclosed to
                               entities outside the District unless the District is
                               required to do so by law.

      10-10-3-5 Burden of Proof: The Appellant has the burden of
                demonstrating that an Effective Rating was appropriate.

      10-10-3-6 The Appellant is allowed an advocate of their choice to
                represent him/her through the appeal process, such as a DCTA
                representative or DPS colleague. Attorneys shall not represent
                the Teacher or the District at the hearing.

      10-10-3-7 The Appellant is allowed to provide evidence in the form of
                testimony by the Appellant, and/or other witnesses, documents,
                or other materials.

      10-10-3-8 The District is allowed to provide evidence in the form of a
                District representative, witness testimony (e.g. Evaluator),
                and/or documents and other materials.

      10-10-3-9 Any presentation to the Panel shall be limited to one hour for the
                Teacher and one hour for the District. Time may be extended at
                the discretion of a majority of the Panel members.

10-10-4 Panel

      10-10-4-1 The Panel will be chosen from a list of up to 30 standing panel
                members. For the standing panel pool, up to 15 will be chosen
                by the Association and up to 15 chosen by the District; however,
                in the process of composing the final list, the Association may
                veto any panel member recommended by the District, and the
                District may veto any panel member recommended by the
                Association. To ensure the credibility of the Panel, Panel
                members shall have had an effective LEAP, LEAD, or LIFT
                evaluation the prior year and shall have prior teaching
                experience.

      10-10-4-2 The Panel shall be composed of equal numbers of DCTA
                representatives and District representatives, with no more than
                six panel members total. The Association shall be responsible
                for selecting its members from the standing pool for each Panel
                hearing and the District shall be responsible for selecting its
                members for each Panel hearing. A process shall be jointly
                developed to ensure continuity of the review panel members.


                                50 of 137
10-10-5 Results

       10-10-5-1 Panel decision:

                  10-10-5-1-1 The Panel shall render its decision in writing.

                  10-10-5-1-2 In order for the Panel to recommend changing the
                              second consecutive Ineffective Rating Effective, a
                              majority of the members of the panel must agree
                              based on a preponderance of the evidence that
                              the Ineffective Rating was inaccurate. In that
                              situation, the Appellant’s rating will be deemed
                              Effective and the Appellant will retain their
                              non-probationary status.

                  10-10-5-1-3 If a majority of the Panel determines by a
                              preponderance of the evidence that the rating
                              should not be changed, the Teacher will be
                              deemed probationary.

                  10-10-5-1-4 If the majority of the Panel decides that an
                              Ineffective Rating was not accurate, but there is
                              not sufficient information to assign a rating of
                              Effective, the Teacher receives a “no score” and
                              retains non-probationary status. However, if the
                              following academic year that Teacher receives a
                              second consecutive Ineffective Rating, the “no
                              score” rating will have the consequence of a
                              second consecutive Ineffective Rating and the
                              Teacher will lose their non-probationary status.
                              The Teacher retains the right to appeal the
                              following year’s rating.

                  10-10-5-1-5 A majority decision of the Panel shall be final and
                              binding.

       10-10-5-2 Superintendent and/or designee decision:

                  10-10-5-2-1 If the Panel is deadlocked on a decision, the
                              Superintendent or designee shall serve as the
                              tie-breaking vote. Each cluster of votes is
                              expected to provide a summary of the rationale
                              informing their opinion for the Superintendent or
                              designee’s consideration.




                               51 of 137
                        10-10-5-2-2 If the Superintendent or designee decides that
                                    there is sufficient information to overturn the
                                    rating, the teacher receives a rating of Effective
                                    and retains non-probationary status.

                        10-10-5-2-3 If the Superintendent or designee decides that an
                                    Ineffective Rating was not accurate, but there is
                                    not sufficient information to assign a rating of
                                    Effective, the Teacher receives a “no score” and
                                    retains non-probationary status. However, if the
                                    following academic year that Teacher receives a
                                    second consecutive Ineffective Rating, the “no
                                    score” rating will have the consequence of a
                                    second consecutive Ineffective Rating and the
                                    Teacher will lose their non-probationary status.
                                    The Teacher retains the right to appeal the
                                    following year’s rating.

                  10-10-5-2-4 If the Superintendent and/or designees confirm the
                              rating, the Teacher will be deemed probationary.

                  10-10-5-2-5 The Superintendent and/or designee’s decision will be
                              final.

                      Part 6: LEAP Collaboration Committee

10-11 LEAP and SSP GPS Collaboration Committee.

     10-11-1 Purpose. The purpose of the LEAP Collaboration Committee (LCC and
             SSP GPS Collaboration Committee (GPS Committee) is to ensure that
             LEAP and SSP GPS are administered according to this Agreement and to
             enable collaboration and joint decision-making where possible in the
             development, implementation and evaluation of the growth and
             performance systems for Teachers and SSPs.

     10-11-2 Composition. The composition of the respective Committees shall have
             equal District and DCTA representation. Association representation shall
             be appointed by the Association President.

              10-11-2-1 Members of the LEAP and GPS Committee will be provided
                        release time to attend meetings in accordance with Article
                        10-11-4.

              10-11-2-2 The LCC shall establish a Special Education LCC
                        sub-committee consisting of an equal number of DPS and
                        DCTA representatives.


                                      52 of 137
     10-11-3 List of Duties.

                1. Review and revise LEAP and SSP GPS;

                2. Review LEAP and SSP GPS training processes, including
                   calibration and certification processes;

                3. Review the multiple measures and their cut points;

                4. Review the methods for calculation of student growth in LEAP and
                   SSP GPS;

                5. Review a yearly summary of concerns raised through the Growth
                   and Performance Helpline to inform changes to the district practice
                   and/or policy;

                6. Review evaluation system surveys;

                7. Review the redress and appeals processes, when needed;

                8. Review appropriate feedback mechanisms for Evaluators;

                9. Review evaluation frameworks as needed;

                10. Consider the development of a shortened framework for novice
                    educators; and

                11. Other duties as outlined in this Article.

     10-11-4 Frequency of Meetings. The LEAP Committee shall meet at least quarterly
             but shall meet more often as action is required.

     10-11-5 Decision Making. The LEAP and SSP GPS Committee shall have the
             ability to make changes to LEAP and SSP GPS by consensus. If
             consensus is not reached, the matter shall go to the Superintendent to
             decide. The Association will be given the opportunity to provide in writing
             to the Superintendent their recommendation to resolve the Committee’s
             lack of consensus. The Superintendent will review and consider any
             response by the Association prior to issuing a decision.

                               Part 7: Miscellaneous Items

10-12 DPS and DCTA will continue to work with research-practice
      partners to conduct and communicate research on the growth and performance of
      systems for Teachers and SSPs to support evidence-informed decision making.



                                        53 of 137
10-13 Utilize the SSP GPS committee to collaborate with department
      leadership teams to look at the current resource bank and look at ways to
      improve/expand for specialized areas.

10-14 DPS and DCTA will collaborate to support mutually agreeable
      legislation that calls for changes to educator effectiveness legislation.

 Article 11 - Complaints Against Teachers/Administrative Leave/Corrective Action

11-1 Complaints Against Educators. When a person makes a written or verbal
     complaint against an educator, the principal or designee shall promptly notify the
     educator of the complaint, the identity of the complainant, and the educator shall
     be given the opportunity to respond. The principal or designee shall investigate the
     complaint and attempt to resolve the complaint informally if appropriate.

       11-1-1 If appropriate, the principal or designee shall arrange a meeting with the
              complainant, the educator and the principal or designee in an attempt to
              resolve the situation.

       11-1-2 If any record of the complaint, or its formal or informal resolution, is placed
              in the educator’s files, the educator shall have the right to file a written
              response within twenty (20) school days.

      11-1-3 Upon receiving a written or verbal concern of discrimination, harrassment,
              retaliation, including alleged violations of Title IX, the District Discrimination
              Prevention and Response Coordinator or their site level designee, may not
              immediately disclose the identity of the complainant until after the initial
              meeting with the Complainant and for the period of time necessary to
              implement supportive measures and ascertain next steps.

              11-1-3-1 Upon request, a complainant or respondent
                       may have either a non-witness educator or representative from
                       the Association (collectively “representative”) present at an
                       AC-R1 (DPR) investigative interview conducted by an
                       investigator assigned by Office of Talent (Human Resources).
                       Such a request must not unduly interfere with the investigator’s
                       ability to conduct a timely investigation. During questioning by the
                       investigator, the representative may participate only to the extent
                       of seeking clarification of questions. The investigator may remove
                       a representative from an investigative interview if they are
                       deemed to be interfering with the interview or engage in
                       disruptive behavior; where a representative is removed, the
                       interview will continue without a representative present.




                                          54 of 137
11-2 Administrative Leave. If a principal or designee decides to place an educator on
      administrative leave for the purpose of further investigation, the principal or
      designee shall meet with the educator to give specific allegation(s) and the basic
      reason why the administrative leave for investigation is necessary, when possible.

      11-2-1 The meeting shall take place at the end of the school day or whenever it is
             appropriate.

      11-2-2 The principal shall provide the educator a copy of the administrative leave
             checklist and review it with the teacher. The educator shall sign the form
             only as acknowledgement of receipt and be given a copy of it for
             informational reference.

      11-2-3 At the teacher’s request a meeting will be held within three (3) school
            days. The purpose of the meeting is to give the educator an opportunity to
            respond as to the purpose of the need for administrative leave. The
            educator may have Association representation at the meeting.

      11-2-4 The investigation will be completed as expeditiously as possible. If an
            investigation must extend beyond seven (7) calendar days, or if the
            administrative leave must be extended, the educator and the Association
            will be notified by email after fourteen (14) calendar days phone calls from
            the Office of Talent (Human Resources) or designee the reasons for the
            extension and the expected date of completion of the investigation and/or
            leave.

             11-2-4-1 If administrative leave extends beyond
                      thirty (30) calendar days the educator may request a meeting. The
                      educator shall request the meeting via email and the meeting will
                      be held within three (3) school days. The purpose of the meeting
                      is to share with the educator a status update of the investigation.

      11-2-5 During the investigation, the educator placed on administrative leave will
             continue to receive full pay. All rules for active employees will continue to
             apply.

      11-2-6 Following the completion of the investigation, the principal or designee
             shall meet with the educator to share the results of the investigation and to
             give the educator an opportunity to respond. The educator may have
             Association representation at the meeting. The principal or designee shall
             determine appropriate resolution of the matter.

      11-2-7 Administrative leave should be considered as an option to be used only
             when necessary to protect the students or staff or to conduct an
             appropriate investigation. Administrative leave is not a punitive action and
             there will be no record of the leave in an educator’s personnel file.



                                        55 of 137
      11-2-8 The Agreement Review Committee (ARC) will review on an annual basis
             administrative leaves for the prior year to ensure that the above
             procedures have been implemented appropriately.

11-3 Corrective Action. Before taking a corrective action against an educator, the
     principal or designee shall investigate the situation, meet with the educator and
     give the educator an opportunity to respond.

      11-3-1 If a principal or designee determines it may be necessary to take a
             corrective action, the principal shall inform the educator of their intent to
             consider potential corrective action measures and allow the educator the
             opportunity to have either another educator or representation from the
             Association present at this meeting.

      11-3-2 The principal or designee shall follow the procedures established in the
             District document “Basic Fairness and Due Process, A Guide for Corrective
             Discipline.”

      11-3-3 Neither a letter of warning nor a letter of reprimand shall be issued, nor
             shall an educator be suspended without pay, except for just cause.

                           Article 12 - Instructional Materials

12-1 In order to provide the best possible educational program in each school, the
     District will endeavor to provide sufficient instructional materials and equipment to
     ensure that each pupil and teacher, including ELA-S teachers and special
     education teachers, will have access to them. Consistent with that goal, the District
     will work to provide appropriate core content materials for special education
     teachers comparable to what is used in mainstream classrooms. The District shall
     also provide, wherever available, grade- and subject-appropriate
     Spanish-language core content materials, comparable to the English-language
     content materials used in Mainstream English language classrooms, for ELLs who
     are taught in Spanish in ELA-S and dual language classes.

      12-1-1 Prior to final preparation of budgets for materials and supplies, the CSC, in
             consultation with the teachers affected, will determine an equitable
             distribution of resources in the proposed budget. The final building budgets
             will reflect the priorities established by the CSC.

      12-1-2 Each school will be allocated a revolving fund through their budget
             accounts to use for the purpose of instructional materials that are not
             otherwise readily obtainable by teachers.

12-2 The Association and the District support equal educational opportunity for all
     children in the Denver Public Schools. It is their mutual aim, through the careful



                                         56 of 137
      selection of multi-ethnic instructional materials, to help students develop a sense of
      individual worth and respect for the worth of others, regardless of their ethnic or
      cultural backgrounds.

12-3 When the District convenes committees to review and adopt curriculum, teachers
     will always be part of the process. Additionally, the Association shall have the right
     to appoint one member to serve on District curriculum committees. The appointee
     must have expertise in the stated curriculum area.

                  Article 13 - Assignments, Schedules and Transfer

13-1 General Principles. Educator assignments, schedules and transfers will be made
     in the best interest of the educational program for the students and consistent with
     educator preparation, certification, licensure and experience. Every effort will be
     made to identify the District educational strategies, programs and leadership in a
     timely manner to maximize site-based planning, educator selection, assignments
     and transfers.

13-2 Qualifications/Eligibility. In order to be considered for a position, an educator
     must meet accreditation standards of the Colorado Department of Education and
     must meet all posted requirements for the position including the requirements set
     forth by the Every Student Succeeds Act.

13-3 Tentative Programs. Educators shall be notified of their tentative program,
     schedule, or grade level assignment for the ensuing semester or year as
     applicable, as soon as possible following preparation of the master schedule. In
     addition, they will be notified of changes in their tentative program, schedule, or
     grade level assignment, if any.

13-4 Educator scheduling shall be made without regard to race, creed, color, sexual
     orientation, national origin, gender/sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, and related
     medical conditions), gender identity, transgender status, intersex status, marital
     status, age, veteran status, and consistent with the provisions of the Americans
     with Disabilities Act, membership in any teacher organization or such other
     specified human or civil rights as may be protected by statute.

13-5 School schedules for each educator normally will include a variety of assignments.
     The District and the Association recognize that students who are not achieving to
     the level of ability need the expertise of experienced teachers as much as do
     students with high achievement levels.

13-6 Once a Performance Improvement Plan (PIP) is implemented, the educator may be
      transferred only with written consent of the evaluator, the educator, and the
      principal of the school to which transfer is sought.




                                         57 of 137
13-7 Timelines. The Office of Talent (Human Resources) shall determine the start date
     of the open market staffing cycle as early as practicable after schools have
     submitted their staffing vacancies and needs. The timeline for the key dates and
     activities listed below will be communicated to the Association no later than
     January 31.

      Key dates and activities:

      ● Teachers verify consideration group. (Article 13-10)
      ● Educator requests for Early Retirement Incentive, move to part-time/job share,
        and Extended Leave of Absence notice submitted. (Articles 13-10, 21, 23,
        29-13)
      ● Recommendation for non-renewal of probationary teachers.
      ● In-Building Bidding and Reduction in Building Staff interviews conducted by
        Personnel Committees. (Articles 13-10)
      ● Assignment of unassigned non-probationary teachers. (Article 13-17)

13-8 Personnel Committee.

      13-8-1 Each school shall establish a Personnel Committee to select candidates
             for vacancies and Reduction in Building Staff (RIBS) at the school building.

      13-8-2 The Personnel Committee will be composed of the principal and three (3)
             teachers chosen by a vote of the faculty, and may have no more than two
             (2) parent(s) as member(s) appointed by the Collaborative School
             Committee.

      13-8-3 Educator members will be chosen by the faculty. The Personnel
             Committee may have one (1) or more of the educator assignments filled,
             on a rotating basis, by (a) educator(s) in the grade, team, or department in
             which the vacancy exists. The Personnel Committee will determine
             whether more than one (1) Personnel Committee is necessary to meet the
             needs of the school.

      13-8-4 The Personnel Committee will make decisions by consensus, if possible. If
             the Personnel Committee is unable to reach a decision by consensus, the
             principal shall make an impasse decision.

             13-8-4-1 A consensus decision is either unanimous or a majority decision
                      that the entire Committee (including the dissenters) will support.

             13-8-4-2 The District in collaboration with the Association will establish
                      and provide resources for training and effective functioning of the
                      Personnel Committee.



                                       58 of 137
     13-8-5 The decision or results of the Personnel Committee shall not be grievable.
            The failure to comply with the procedure contained in this Article is subject
            to grievance.

     13-8-6 In determining the most suitable candidate for a vacant position or
            reducing a member of the staff, the Personnel Committee shall consider
            the following criteria:

            ● instructional practices,
            ● classroom management,
            ● appropriateness of academic preparation,
            ● teaching experience in the subject areas of the assignment and/or
              grade level,
            ● participation in school activities beyond the classroom,
            ● appraisals and relevant information in the central personnel file,
            ● other criteria specific to the position as stated in the job posting,
            ● building level interview,
            ● references.

     13-8-7 The Personnel Committee shall operate all year, with the exception that
            outside of the school year the principal shall make a good faith effort to
            assemble as many of the Personnel Committee members or alternates as
            may be available. During the assignment of unassigned non-probationary
            teachers, the principal will communicate with the Personnel Committee
            without the necessity of an interview process.

13-9 Relocation, Changes in Program, and Opening of a New School.

     13-9-1 Relocation. When a school and/or school program is relocated from one
            site to another, currently assigned educators with contracts will maintain
            their assignment pursuant to the provisions of Article 13. They will not
            have to interview for their positions. If the relocation of a school or school
            program results in more staff than are necessary for that location, the
            reduction in building process and timeline in Article 13-10 will be used.

     13-9-2 Changes in Program. The provisions of Article 13, which allow for the
            administrative transfer of staff due to a change in program, adopted by the
            Collaborative School Committee and affirmed by the Superintendent, will
            be appropriately followed.

     13-9-3 Opening or Redesign of a School. When a new school is opened or
            redesigned, the principal shall make hiring decisions until the new
            Personnel Committee becomes operational. After the principal has hired


                                         59 of 137
             the first five educators, the principal shall get input from at least two
             educators on additional hiring decisions. The principal will follow the
             processes and standards set out in this Article.

13-10 Reduction in Building Staff (RIBS).

      13-10-1 The Collaborative School Committee will charge the Personnel
              Committee with the task of conducting a Reduction in Building Staff upon
              receipt of information that reduced the number of DCTA bargaining unit
              assignments at a school, or when a Collaborative School Committee
              decides fewer DCTA bargaining unit assignments are needed in a
              department, grade level or ELA/specialty area. Procedures for
              centrally-assigned bargaining unit members are in Article 29.

      13-10-2 Following a determination of staffing needs including all attrition
              (resignations, retirements, educator declaration of vacancies, and
              employees returning from leave) and declaration of consideration group,
              the Personnel Committee shall establish the group of educators to be
              considered for reduction. The determination of staffing needs should
              include identification of all educators who would volunteer to vacate a
              position.

      13-10-3 The consideration group may be a grade level, department or specialty
              area. The consideration group shall be defined as narrowly as possible
              based on program needs. The Personnel Committee shall notify the
              affected consideration group as soon as possible. Educators will not be
              required to re-interview for their positions if they are not in an affected
              consideration group.

               13-10-3-1 For the purpose of establishing consideration groups,
                         educators serving in more than one department, grade level
                         or ELA/specialty area shall annually declare the department,
                         grade level or ELA/specialty area in which they choose to be
                         considered no later than the completion of the third week of
                         school.

               13-10-3-2 Each educator may reside in only one consideration group.

               13-10-3-3 Excluding job share educators, contract educators who are
                         assigned to a school less than full-time, shall be accorded the
                         same transfer rights as other teachers in the consideration
                         group.

      13-10-4 Educators on approved leaves where their positions are being held in
              accordance with Article 21 shall be considered equally for the purpose of
              reduction.



                                        60 of 137
13-10-5 The Personnel Committee shall establish and make available to all
        faculty members a written procedure that will be followed when
        determining the teacher(s) to be reduced from a building. In developing
        the procedures for Reduction in Building Staff, the Personnel Committee
        shall include the following:

             ● Educators in the consideration group may choose to vacate an
               assignment.
             ● Educators in the consideration group should be allowed to
               interview for any vacancy in the school that is posted through the
               in-building bidding process.
             ● All members of the consideration group must be interviewed by
               the Personnel Committee.
             ● If it is determined that a specific reduction is no longer necessary
               (at any time between the RIB and the conclusion of fall
               adjustment for the subsequent school year), the reduced teacher
               has the first right of refusal to his/her former position.

13-10-6 The Personnel Committee shall attempt to reach consensus on the
        candidate most suitable to be reduced. If the Personnel Committee is
        unable to reach consensus, the principal will decide which candidate will
        be reduced.

13-10-7 At the time of the reduction, impacted educators will be provided with
        notice of the obligation to secure a mutual consent assignment as well as
        information about the staffing process. Educators whose positions are
        reduced will have the option of participating in resume-writing
        workshops, interview training and/or other supports provided by the
        District. Any educator transferred during the school year by the District
        may be provided with up to two (2) days of non-pupil contact planning
        time in order to permit the transferred educator to make an orderly
        transition between the two (2) assignments.

13-10-8 Unassigned RIB’d teachers are expected to participate in the teacher
        staffing process.

13-10-9 Leaves/Job Share/Retirement. See related Articles 20, 22, 27-6.

13-10-10 Guaranteed interviews for reduced active non-probationary teachers, as
         required by state law, are offered through District-wide hiring fairs. DPS
         will consult with DCTA regarding the structure of any such hiring fairs.
         Non-probationary teachers, including teachers who have been
         displaced as a result of school closure or redesign, who are not able to
         interview with two or more schools during the hiring fairs will contact


                                 61 of 137
                  DPS Department of Human Resources as soon as practicable for
                  assistance in scheduling the two guaranteed interviews.

13-11 School Redesign, Restart, and Closure. The parties affirm that the action to
      redesign a school is due to structure and design reasons and is not a reflection on
      individual educator competency. The Association and the District enter into this
      Agreement to assure that a known and fair process is followed in the treatment of
      personnel in a school that has been designated for redesign, restart, or closure.

       13-11-1 The parties agree the treatment of personnel at schools impacted by
               redesign to be as follows:

                     a. Among the criteria that will be considered in hiring decisions will
                        be familiarity with the school, students, parents and Community.

                     b. All educators who have assignments at the school will have an
                        opportunity to interview for vacant positions with the principal
                        until a new Personnel Committee is elected.

                     c. Educators who are not selected through this process defined in
                        #b may apply for and be interviewed for positions during the open
                        market staffing cycle.

                     d. Educators who choose to leave the redesigned school, or who
                        interview at the school but are not selected, will be invited to
                        participate in the spring hiring fair and other opportunities
                        available to unassigned educators. Non-probationary teachers
                        who are not able to interview with two or more schools during the
                        hiring fairs will contact DPS Department of Human Resources as
                        soon as practicable for assistance in scheduling the two
                        guaranteed interviews.

                     e. The District and the Association will monitor this process to
                        ensure adherence to this procedure.

                     f. The District may require additional work outside the normal
                        school day, time beyond the adopted school year, or activities
                        attributable to the design of the new teaching and learning
                        structure and programs at the school. Compensation for such
                        time will be in accordance with the applicable provisions of this
                        Agreement.

13-11-2 The parties agree that the treatment of personnel impacted by closure or restart
              will be as follows: At a minimum, educators who are reduced as a result
              of the restart or closure will be invited to participate in the District’s spring
              hiring fair and other opportunities available to unassigned educators.



                                          62 of 137
VOLUNTARY TRANSFERS

13-12 Specialized Service Providers (SSPs). Specialized service providers, including
      nurses, social workers, psychologists, speech language pathologists, audiologists,
      occupational therapists, physical therapists, counselors, and any other specialty
      group, shall be transferred according to a written procedure made available to all
      affected employees, designed by their Department Leadership Team (DLT).

      13-12-1 In the event that an SSP is reassigned during the
              school year, the SSP may be provided with up to two (2) working days of
              non-pupil contact planning time in order to permit the transferred SSP to
              make an orderly transition between the two assignments.

      13-12-2 If an SSP is not assigned by the end of the
              traditional school year, the Office of Talent ( Human Resources) or
              designee will notify them by the last day of the school year to discuss the
              status of the assignment.


13-13 In-Building Bidding.

      13-13-1 The Department Chairs at the secondary level and grade level Chairs at
              the elementary level, in collaboration with the principal, will establish
              procedures whereby teachers may indicate assignment preferences. All
              such procedures shall emphasize the needs of students as the primary
              consideration for assignment. Teacher preferences may be established
              at grade level meetings, departmental meetings, or team meetings, as
              appropriate.

      13-13-2 The Personnel Committee shall inform the faculty of any anticipated
              vacant positions. Once posted, the Personnel Committee may elect to
              interview current faculty prior to considering external candidates.

      13-13-3 In determining whether to elect to interview current faculty prior to
              considering external candidates, the Personnel Committee will consider:

                    ● its staffing needs, including the identification of all educators who
                      will vacate their positions;
                    ● Instructional practices;
                    ● Classroom management;
                    ● Appropriateness of academic preparation;
                    ● Experience in the subject areas of the assignment;
                    ● Other criteria specific to the expected vacancy.



                                        63 of 137
      13-13-4 Educators who agree to fill a different position within the same school for
              the next school year, through the in-building bidding procedure, forfeit
              their right to bid for and be assigned to a position listed on the District’s
              Talent Acquisition system.

      13-13-5 Job postings will reflect whether or not the Personnel Committee is
              considering in-building bidding.

13-14 Posting Vacancies.

      13-14-1 The principal shall be responsible for notifying the Department of Human
              Resources of vacancies that are open at their school as soon as they are
              known.

      13-14-2 Each vacancy shall be posted on the District’s Talent Acquisition system.

      13-14-3 The Personnel Committee shall write basic postings and detailed job
              descriptions for all vacancies that occur at their school.

      13-14-4 The Personnel Committee shall write interview questions based on the
              posting. In order to ensure best practices and minimize any potential
              biases, the Personnel Committee’s interview questions and processes
              must align with the best practices provided by the Department of Human
              Resources.

      13-14-5 Postings shall include a brief description of all involved responsibilities,
              and special and unique qualifications.

      13-14-6 Vacancies that occur as a result of an approved leave of absence shall
              be designated as an annual assignment placeholder.

      13-14-7 Vacancies for Teacher on Special Assignment (TOSA) shall be posted
              when they become available.

      13-14-8 Educators who successfully bid on a position during the open market
              staffing cycle are ineligible to bid on subsequent positions posted during
              the same calendar year.

13-15 Applications.

      13-15-1 Educators applying for a vacancy in other schools must complete the
              appropriate application forms. Educators shall not be subject to
              retaliation by their current principal/designee for applying for other district
              vacancies.




                                         64 of 137
      13-15-2 Applications for vacancies may be submitted by any currently qualified
              candidate. The Office of Talent (Human Resources) shall screen all
              applications to ensure compliance with the state law and District
              requirements. The resumes and applications of all qualified candidates
              for a vacancy will be available to the school on the District’s Talent
              Acquisition system.

13-16 Selection Procedure.

      13-16-1 The Personnel Committee shall review all applications and determine
              how many and which applicants will be interviewed. When there are two
              or more applicants for a position, the Personnel Committee shall
              interview a minimum of two candidates.

      13-16-2 Interviews shall be completed and a decision made no later than thirty
              (30) days after the vacancy is posted.

               13-16-2-1 A transfer applicant who is interviewed by the Personnel
                         Committee shall be notified by the Personnel Committee,
                         principal or designee in a timely manner regarding the status
                         of the position.

      13-16-3 The Department of Human Resources will be notified no later than thirty
              (30) days after the vacancy is posted if no candidate is selected. The
              Association will receive this information upon request.

13-17 Unassigned Teachers and Limited Term Assignments.

      13-17-1 A non-probationary teacher who has been displaced from a mutual
              consent position and has not secured a mutual consent assignment is an
              unassigned teacher. The teacher will be placed in a limited-term
              assignment for one year or two hiring cycles, whichever is longer, while
              he/she is attempting to secure a mutual consent assignment. The
              Department of Human Resources or designee will notify unassigned
              teachers when an appropriate limited term assignment has been
              confirmed, and will provide basic details of the assignment. The district
              shall make every effort to place an unassigned teacher in a position for
              which they are qualified and which may be available for mutual consent.

      13-17-2 A simple form to be signed by the principal and the teacher will be
              available to notify HR of intent to convert a temporary teaching
              assignment into a mutual consent position at any time during the year.

      13-17-3 A non-probationary teacher who is in a limited-term assignment and is
              attempting to secure a mutual consent assignment may apply for and
              accept positions throughout the year.



                                      65 of 137
      13-17-4 A non-probationary teacher who does not secure a mutual consent
              assignment within 12 months or two hiring cycles, whichever is longer,
              shall be placed on unpaid leave without benefits until such time as he or
              she secures a mutual consent assignment.

      13-17-5 If a probationary teacher, who was reduced, does not secure a mutual
              consent assignment for the following school year before June 1, the
              teacher will be non-renewed.

      13-17-6 Probationary teachers reduced during the fall adjustment process may be
              placed, at District discretion, into temporary instructional support
              positions for the remainder of the year. Their contract shall be honored
              for the remainder of the school year.

13-18 Reduction in Force

      13-18-1 A reduction in force shall be defined as the
              cancellation of a teacher’s employment contract during their contractual
              period when there is a justifiable decrease in the number of teaching
              positions. Such reduction shall be done in compliance with applicable
              law and in a manner that will maintain the best educational program as
              determined by the District.

      13-18-2 If the District anticipates a reduction in force, the Chief of Talent or
              designee, prior to formal action, shall consult with the Association and
              provide information about the number of employment contracts
              necessitating cancellation and the reasons for the anticipated reduction.

      13-18-3 A reduction in force will occur in the following
                  manner:

                       1. Normal attrition shall precede any reduction in force of
                          regularly assigned teachers.
                       2. Teachers will be considered within an endorsement area by
                          their most current LEAP end-of-year rating in the following
                          order:
                             a. Not meeting;
                             b. Approaching;
                             c. Effective;
                             d. Distinguished.

                           Reduction will occur first to probationary
                           teachers then non-probationary teachers within a LEAP
                           end-of-year rating category in reverse order of being hired as
                           a teacher.



                                        66 of 137
                           If hiring dates are identical, the tie shall be
                           eliminated using the following criteria in
                           descending order:
                               ● Teachers on limited term assignments who have not
                                   secured mutual consent.
                               ● Lowest second most current LEAP end-of-year rating.
                               ● Years of District experience in the endorsement area.
                               ● Highest degree held.

      13-18-4 In the event that reduction in force is necessary, the District shall provide
              thirty (30) calendar days written notice to the affected employee.

13-19 Consolidation of Schools

      13-19-1 In the event of a consolidation of two or more
              schools, non-centrally based educators from the consolidating schools
              will have first rights to interview for posted positions in the new
              consolidated school(s) resulting from their school’s consolidation for
              which they apply and are qualified.

      13-19-2 Educators who applied and did not secure a mutual consent
              position in the first round of hiring will continue to have first rights to
              interview for new positions posted throughout the hiring cycles in grade
              level or content areas for which they have not previously applied and are
              qualified. Throughout the design process of the consolidated schools,
              the consolidated school will post new positions as they become
              available.

      13-19-3 The consolidated school shall implement a Temporary
              Personnel Committee to select candidates for vacancies in the school
              building. The consolidated school’s Temporary Personnel Committee will
              be composed of the principal and elected educators from all of the
              schools impacted by their school’s consolidation process, in the following
              manner:

                    13-19-3-1 When two to three schools are being consolidated
                              into one new school, two educators from each impacted
                              school will be elected by the DCTA bargaining unit
                              members to serve on the Temporary Personnel
                              Committee.

                    13-19-3-2 When four or more schools are being consolidated
                              into one new school, one educator from each impacted
                              school will be elected to serve on the Temporary
                              Personnel Committee.



                                        67 of 137
                    13-19-3-3 Elected members of the Temporary Personnel
                              Committee will recuse themselves from the interviews
                              pertaining to the position for which they apply.

                    13-19-3-4 The Temporary Personnel Committee will make
                              decisions by consensus. A consensus decision is either
                              unanimous or a majority decision that the entire
                              committee (including dissenters) will support. If the
                              Temporary Personnel Committee is unable to reach a
                              decision by consensus, the principal shall make an
                              impasse decision.

                    13-19-3-5 The decision or results of the Temporary Personnel
                              Committee shall not be grievable. The failure to comply
                              with the procedure contained in this section is subject to
                              grievance.

                    13-19-3-6 After the Temporary Personnel Committee has
                              hired fifty percent (50%) of the projected DCTA
                              bargaining unit positions, that committee will be replaced
                              by a Personnel Committee elected from the fifty percent
                              (50%) of educators hired, consistent with the provisions
                              of Article 13-8.

                   Article 14 - Summer School and Evening School

14-1 Summer School and Evening School. Summer and evening school programs
     shall be provided flexibility of design and implementation following the guidelines
     set forth below.

      14-1-1 Staffing. The purpose of all staffing procedures is to find the most suitable
             candidates for the teaching positions needed to run the summer school.

             14-1-1-1 Summer school teaching positions shall be posted.

             14-1-1-2 Postings shall include the following basic components:
                      descriptions of any teaching position that may be included in the
                      summer school, and an explanation of the selection process.

             14-1-1-3 All teaching positions in summer school programs will be filled
                      first by teachers currently in the District.

      14-1-2 Compensation. Teachers will be paid for summer and evening work as
            provided in Article 28.




                                         68 of 137
14-2 Teachers applying for positions in the evening school at Emily Griffith Opportunity
     School shall make written application directly to the Emily Griffith Opportunity
     School. They shall be notified of action on their application. Qualified teachers in
     the District shall be given priority for interviews for positions in the evening school,
     except for adult vocational education classes. In filling such positions,
     consideration will be given to the teacher's area of competence, major and minor
     fields of study, quality of teaching performance, attendance record and the criteria
     specified in Article 13-8-6.

14-3 Educators in full-day Summer School shall receive a minimum of three hundred
     (300) minutes of self-directed planning time per week. Educators in half-day
     Summer School shall receive a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) minutes of
     self-directed planning time per week.

14-4 Educators in full-day Summer School shall receive a forty-five (45) minute daily
     duty-free lunch. Educators in half-day Summer School will receive a fifteen (15)
     minute break.

                              Article 15 - Educator Facilities

15-1 Each school will have the following facilities:

      15-1-1 Space in each classroom in which educators may safely store instructional
             materials and supplies, provided that the District shall not be held to be the
             insurer of the educators personal belongings stored in such space.
             However, the reimbursement provisions of Article 16-2 are applicable.

      15-1-2 A desk and chair for each educator, except in unusual circumstances.

      15-1-3 Well lighted and clean educator restrooms.

15-2 Insofar as financially practicable, each school shall be provided with the following:

      15-2-1 A work room for educators containing equipment and supplies to aid in the
              preparation of instructional materials.

      15-2-2 A furnished room to be used as a faculty lounge. Such a room will be in
             addition to the aforementioned work room.

      15-2-3 Telephone service available to educators which permits privacy of
             conversations.

      15-2-4 Space in the parking lot at each school will be reserved for educator
             parking. When the District is unable to provide off-street parking for
             educators, every effort will be made to provide reserved on-street parking
             as may be needed.



                                          69 of 137
      15-2-5 Each educator will be provided a place which may be locked to keep
             personal items. Such places may be in educators’ lounges or individual
             school rooms.

      15-2-6 Office space other than the faculty lounge for educators whose classrooms
             are not available during the educators’ scheduled planning period.

      15-2-7 The district will provide designated workspaces and necessary resources
              for specialized services providers and itinerant eduators in a school or
              district office which affords educators privacy for providing services to
              students, collaboration with colleagues, and is free from noise and
              interruption.

      15-2-8 SSPs and Itinerant Educators assigned to work in DPS charter schools and
             facility schools who do not have access to the resources outlined below,
             and who have not been able to resolve their needs with the assigned
             charter school leader, may elevate their concerns to their department
             manager or team lead for support in resolution:

                        ●   Wireless Internet;
                        ●   Electrical outlets;
                        ●   Copy machines;
                        ●   Printers;
                        ●   School-provided supplies and instructional materials;
                        ●   Cleaning supplies;
                        ●   Bathroom (keys);
                        ●   Telephone.

15-3 When new schools are constructed, they will include educator facilities of the
     nature noted above.

15-4 Every effort will be made to ensure that for instructional periods, educators will be
    assigned to well-ventilated, heated, and properly lighted classrooms which meet
    applicable health and safety standards, and which allow for an appropriate amount
    of space to meet instructional needs.

             Article 16 - Personal Injury Benefits and Property Damage

16-1 Temporary Total Disability.

      16-1-1 Teachers are covered by the District’s Workers’ Compensation program.

              16-1-1-1 Pursuant to the Colorado Workers’ Compensation Act, educators
                       who have been injured on the job, within the course and scope of
                       their employment, and in the case of temporary total disability,



                                         70 of 137
                       will be paid Temporary Total Disability benefits. The District
                       agrees to supplement Temporary Total Disability for up to four (4)
                       months from their date of injury to the employee’s full salary.
                       Within the four (4) month period, educators will either be taken off
                       of work by their authorized treating physician or released to
                       modified duty. The District has a commitment to all their teachers
                       to provide modified duty. In the case of temporary total disability
                       of more than four (4) months, educators have the option to
                       supplement their Temporary Total Disability with sick time that
                       they have accrued. They will remain on Temporary Total
                       Disability until released by the primary treating physician.

16-2 Property Damage.

     16-2-1 The District shall assume no responsibility for damage to or loss of an
             employees’ personal property with the following exception. In the event an
             employee was within the course and scope of employment on District
             premises and had clothing, wallet/purse, prescription eyeglasses, or
             personal electronic devices damaged, destroyed, or stolen as a result of
             mischief, vandalism, or other workplace hazard, the District shall
             reimburse the employee up to $500.00 per incident. The District will not
             reimburse the employees for damage, destruction, or loss caused by the
             negligence (as defined by the insurance carrier) of the employee.

     16-2-2 The District shall assume no responsibility for damage to employees’
             personal vehicles with the following exception. In the event an employee
             was within the course and scope of employment and had parked their
             personal vehicle on District premises, the District shall reimburse the
             employee for repair or replacement costs not to exceed $500.00 per
             incident for damage to the vehicle sustained as the result of mischief or
             vandalism. The District will not reimburse employees for damage which
             resulted from the negligence (as defined by the insurance carrier) of the
             employee.

     16-2-3 In order for the District to reimburse the educator for losses as outlined in
             this Article, the educator must file a claim by submitting both a written
             District property loss report and a police report, if applicable. The District
             can investigate any or all such claims of loss to ascertain applicability to
             this Article. The maximum dollar amount of claims that will be processed
             for reimbursement for losses occurring during the term of this Agreement
             shall be Thirty Thousand Dollars ($30,000.00). Completed claims will be
             reimbursed on a first come, first served basis.

16-3 Legal Defense Costs and Judgments. Consistent with Colorado law, C.R.S. §
     24-10-110, the District pays legal defense costs and the costs of any legal
     judgment or settlement for a teacher/SSP if the teacher/SSP is sued for alleged



                                        71 of 137
     injuries from any act or omission of the teacher/SSP. This means that if a
     teacher/SSP is sued for an act or omission in the scope of their employment (e.g.,
     for something that happened on the playground while the teacher was on duty),
     and the teacher was not acting “willfully or wantonly,” the District is required to
     provide the teacher/SSP with a lawyer to defend the claim free of charge to the
     teacher/SSP and to pay any settlements or judgments arising from the claim.

                                 Article 17 - Assaults

17-1 Assaults Upon Educators.

     17-1-1 Any educator who has suffered any assault in connection with the
           educator’s employment shall immediately make a written report of the
           circumstances thereof to the administrator in charge of the school or
           department. The assaulted educator may file a complaint with the
           appropriate law enforcement agency against the offender. The
           administrator shall make all reports required by state law. In addition, any
           educator who is assaulted must file a Workers' Compensation report of
           injury with the District within twenty-four (24) hours.

     17-1-2 The Board shall adopt, after consultation with appropriate individuals and
           groups, a safe school plan for handling situations involving potential
           assaults on staff by adults and/or students. The plan shall include any
           statutory requirements concerning assault upon, disorderly conduct toward,
           harassment of, and making false accusations directed toward any educator.
           This plan will be reviewed with the faculty by the principal at the beginning
           of each school year.

17-2 Educators Accused of Assault.

     17-2-1 An educator accused of assault shall make written reports to the
            administrator in charge of the school or department, attaching copies of any
            summons, complaint, process, information, indictment, notice or demand
            served upon the educator in connection with such assault within five (5)
            days after the educator has been served therewith, and reporting the final
            disposition of any such proceeding.

     17-2-2 Such reports will be forwarded to the District by the administrator and, in
            the event civil or criminal proceedings are brought against the educator,
            the District will comply with any reasonable request by the educator for
            such information in the District’s possession not privileged by law or policy
            of the District and which is determined to be relevant to the incident
            reported.

     17-2-3 If criminal or civil proceedings are brought against an educator alleging that
             the educator committed an assault in connection with the educator’s



                                       72 of 137
              employment, such educator, after making the reports described in Article
              17-2-1 above, may request District assistance in the preparation of the
              educator’s defense. Upon receipt of such request, the District will instruct
              its attorney to consult with the educator’s legal counsel and cooperate with
              such counsel in the preparation of the educator’s defense, insofar as the
              interests of the educator and the District are not conflicting.

                                 Article 18 - Student Discipline

       Each school will develop a discipline plan that is consistent with the provisions of
       this Article and Board Policy JK and Board Policy JK-R and aligned to the
       District’s commitment to restorative practices. Annually, the School Leadership
       Team (SLT) will collaborate with the principal on the design and implementation
       of a prevention, intervention and discipline plan. The principal shall submit the
       plan for review to the CSC and faculty at least annually to ensure its
       effectiveness. The plan will be presented to educators and staff prior to the first
       student contact day. Each school shall continue to have flexibility to review and
       make changes as necessary throughout the school year.

18-1 The prevention, intervention, and discipline plan shall include:
      1. Restorative practices with meaningful training and support for teachers made
         available.
      2. Identified Tier 1, Tier 2, and Tier 3 support components.
      3. Descriptions of roles and responsibilities of different staff members in enacting
         the plan.

18-2 In order to meet the unique needs of the school, the prevention, intervention, and
     discipline plan may include, but is not limited to:

      1. Social-emotional training and equity support practices common at the school
         with training made available as needed. This could include referring to
         resources provided by the Exceptional Student Service Office.
      2. A designated “behavior specialist” if the school has a high degree of behavioral
         needs
      3. An advisement period that includes social-emotional training for students.
      4. A full-time staff member, or teacher leader, designated for training restorative
         support

18-3 The parties recognize that a classroom free of disruption is essential for learning.
     When an educator judges it necessary to protect the instructional process, they
     may remove a disruptive student from class and refer the student to the
     administrator in charge or the administrator’s designee. As soon as possible the
     educator or school principal or designee will contact the parent or legal guardian
     and request a conference regarding the removal.




                                         73 of 137
18-4 A Student Support Plan may be developed at this time, but must be developed
     after the second removal of the student from the class. The plan should be
     consistent with the building discipline plan. Conditions under which students will be
     returned to class after the first or second removal, including the time period which
     should expire before the student is returned, shall be part of the behavior plan if
     developed. Development of the plan is the responsibility of the school leadership
     after consulting with the educator(s) and parent(s)/legal guardian(s). The student
     will not be returned to class until a conference has been held with the educator,
     principal or designee and student.

18-5 Upon the third removal (with the exception of students with an active IEP), the
     student may be removed, consistent with the Board policy on student discipline,
     from the educator’s class for the remainder of the term. Whether the student will
     be in place in a different education setting, suspended or expelled, will be in
     accordance with Board policy and IDEA regulations.

      18-5-1 In the discipline plan, which will be reviewed annually, the CSC will
              incorporate the requirements of C.R.S. 22-32-109.1 and Board policy
              concerning assault, disorderly conduct toward, harassment of, and making
              knowingly a false accusation of child abuse against an educator.

      18-5-2 In implementing the discipline plan an educator shall be protected from civil
              or criminal liability as provided by C.R.S. 22-32-109.1(9).

      18-5-3 If a principal has evidence that an educator is referring an excessive
              number of students for disciplinary reasons, the principal shall review the
              classroom practices with the educator and try to determine if a more
              preventive approach is possible through change in practice, or if the
              educator would benefit from staff development. However, this concern
              shall not be utilized as a reason for returning a student to class who has
              been excluded by the educator without the conference referred to above.

18-6 The Denver Public Schools believes that proper student conduct, reinforced by an
     effective prevention, intervention and discipline support plan, is essential to create
     and maintain a positive school climate necessary for learning. Denver Public
     Schools acknowledges the important role of an effective discipline plan and
     culturally-responsive restorative practices. In order to ensure the respect and
     safety of educators, the District and the Denver Classroom Teachers Association
     acknowledge educators rights relative to student discipline and the District set forth
     certain educators rights in Board of Education policy. The discipline policy (JK and
     JK-R) was established in consultation with the Denver Classroom Teachers
     Association and any amendments or alterations of the policy will include
     collaboration from the Denver Classroom Teachers Association.

                         Article 19 - Personal Health Problems




                                        74 of 137
19-1 Educators who experience personal health problems such as alcoholism, drug
     abuse, depression, stress, or similar illness, and who voluntarily seek help for such
     problems, may be referred, through the Department of Human Resources, to the
     appropriate health agency or private physician, on a voluntary basis.

19-2 The District will make available, through the District’s Employee Assistance
     Program (EAP), a comprehensive listing of self-help programs, mental health
     centers and other treatment facilities.

19-3 Confidentiality will be respected at all times by District employees.

                             Article 20 - Leaves of Absence

20-1 Short Leaves of Absence.

       20-1-1 Sick Leave.

              20-1-1-1 The District will allow ten (10) days of leave each year for
                       educators, which will accrue consistent with the DCTA work year
                       calendar and which may be used for the purpose of sick leave.

                         20-1-1-1-1 Each year, educators will begin with three days
                                    front-loaded to their sick balance. Regular accrual
                                    of sick days will begin on the fourth month of the
                                    Educator’s contract.

              20-1-1-2 Sick leave is to be used for an educator’s own illness, illness of
                       an immediate family member, or the death of a family member
                       or friend.

              20-1-1-3 Unused sick leave shall be accumulated from year to year.

              20-1-1-4 The Sick Leave Bank will be continued under guidelines and
                       procedures developed and administered by the Benefits Board
                       approved by the District and the Association. Educators shall be
                       automatically enrolled in the Sick Leave Bank.

                         20-1-1-4-1 Educators will not be required to draw down their
                                    personal days before they access the Sick Leave
                                    Bank.

              20-1-1-5 Unused accumulated sick leave will be included in the
                       Compensation for Unused Sick Leave Program of the District up
                       to a total number of one hundred eighty six (186) days. See
                       Article 27-10.




                                         75 of 137
20-1-1-6 Because of the changes in this Article on Short Leaves of
         Absence effective January 1, 1991, it is the policy of the District
         that any educator who accumulated sick leave days in excess of
         one hundred and ninety (190) days prior to December 31, 1990,
         shall continue to be credited with such accumulation, and such
         accumulation will be eligible for and included in the sick leave
         annuity program of the District.

20-1-1-7 Selling Sick Leave. Under the provisions below, educators shall
         be allowed to convert unused sick leave from any one year to
         cash payments.

           a. Only unused sick leave from the previous school year shall
              be eligible for conversion by an individual. Balances from
              prior years will not be eligible. Conversion will be allowed
              only if the educator’s sick day balance will be more than 10
              days after the conversion. The calculation of the amount of
              sick leave that is eligible shall be made after any
              conversions from personal leave to sick leave have
              occurred. Conversions from personal leave to sick leave
              will occur no later than July 1.

           b. The conversion value shall be at the daily substitute
              teacher’s rate as defined in the contract.

           c. The dollar limit on conversion for any educator shall be
              3/181 times his/her annual base salary.

           d. There is an overall limit on conversions equal to the
              2002-03 base year expenditures for substitute teachers
              minus the expenditures for the year in question. Both
              expenditures from the substitute teacher pool and for
              substitutes paid from the Long-Term Leave pool shall be
              counted. The calculation shall include an adjustment to the
              base year for changes in the rate of substitute teacher pay
              subsequent to the base year.

           e. In the event that educator requests for sick leave
              conversions exceed the limit in (d) above, the requests for
              conversion shall be prorated. Educators will get a share of
              the available days proportional to their share of the
              requested days.

           f. Educators shall file a request with the benefits office for
              conversion on or before June 1 or the end of school
              whichever is later of each year. The benefits office shall



                          76 of 137
                      obtain the overall expenditure limit from the budget office
                      and allocate amounts to each request in accord with the
                      provisions above. The payments shall be made in the
                      August paycheck. Educators may elect to redirect the
                      payment into a 403(b), a 457, or other approved plans
                      subject to the rules of those plans.

20-1-2 Personal Leave.

       20-1-2-1 Educators will have up to four (4) days per year of personal
                leave pro-rated by their FTE.

       20-1-2-2 Personal leave will be granted to educators to attend personal
                matters with prior notification and approval of the principal (or
                immediate supervisor). No explanation of the reasons for the
                absence will be required except when emergency situations
                cause educators to seek approval for absences on shorter
                notice. Unused personal leave will be accumulated from year to
                year as sick leave.

       20-1-2-3 Personal leave may not be used to extend a period of school
                intermission or used in conjunction with the observance of a
                Federal Holiday.

20-1-3 Bereavement Leave.

       20-1-3-1 Denver Public Schools provides between three (3) to five
                (5) days off for employees to handle matters related to a death
                in the family. The amount of time to provide is based on
                relationship to the family member. The leave is unpaid but
                educators may use accrued leave for salary continuation as
                outlined in the Employment Practice Manual.

20-1-4 Legal Proceedings Leave.

       20-1-4-1 Educators shall be granted leave time necessary to make
                appearances in any legal proceedings connected with the
                educator’s employment. The educator shall be required to
                present the subpoena or summons to verify the educator’s need
                for absence.

20-1-5 Additional Leave Restrictions.

       20-1-5-1 If an educator’s request for personal leave is not approved, a
                 specific reason will be provided in writing by the principal (or
                 immediate supervisor).



                                 77 of 137
             20-1-5-2 Application for leave for purposes other than sick leave and
                      Association Leave shall be submitted in the District’s electronic
                      substitute/guest teacher system at least five (5) working days in
                      advance, except in case of emergency. For any days other than
                      sick days, the substitute/guest teacher system will notify the
                      principal and request approval/denial of the leave.

20-2 Family Medical Leaves of Absence Under FMLA

     20-2-1 Pursuant to the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA), educators who have
            been employed for at least twelve (12) cumulative months during the last
            seven (7) years and have worked for at least 1,250 hours during the twelve
            (12) month period prior the requested leave may be eligible for benefits
            under FMLA. The twelve (12) months during which the educator must have
            been employed do not have to be consecutive. An employee who is taking
            FMLA leave because of the employee’s own serious health condition or the
            serious health condition of a family member must use all paid sick, personal
            and vacation leave (in that order) prior to being eligible for unpaid leave.
             Paid leave runs concurrently with and does not extend the duration of the
            leave.

     20-2-2 The District shall at the time of approving the educator’s request for such
            leave, give the educator written notice specifying which portion of such
            leave will be designated as FMLA leave. Other provisions of FMLA and
            District policy may apply to the FMLA portion of the leave. Please see the
            Employee Handbook for more information on district FMLA policy.

     20-2-3 Maternity, Paternity and Adoption Leave. All educators employed half-time
            or more will be (provided all eligibility requirements are met) granted
            maternity, paternity and/or adoption leave for up to one (1) year, without
            pay or increment, when requested in writing.

            20-2-3-1 A request for maternity, paternity or adoption leave must be
                     presented to the District at least thirty (30) days prior to the date
                     on which the requested leave will commence. Exceptions will be
                     made in the event of unforeseen medical complications.

            20-2-3-2 The educator will remain as part of their school staff while on
                     leave. To the extent the vacated position requires a replacement,
                     it will be filled using a placeholder or a long-term substitute. In no
                     case will the educator’s position with the district be held for more
                     than one (1) year.

            20-2-3-4 Within six months of ratification of this Agreement, the
                     Association and District shall convene a joint committee with



                                       78 of 137
                      membership from multiple employee groups to explore creating
                      paid parental leave. The committee shall report its
                      recommendations not later than one year after the ratification of
                      the Agreement.

     20-2-4 Family Illness Leave. A leave of absence of up to one (1) year, without pay
            or increment, will be granted to educators (provided all eligibility
            requirements are met) for the purpose of caring for a sick member of the
            teacher’s immediate family, as defined under the Family and Medical Leave
            Act (FMLA), who is suffering from a serious medical condition. The
            educator will remain as part of their school staff while on leave. To the
            extent the vacated position requires a replacement, it will be posted and
            filled using a placeholder or a long-term substitute for the remainder of the
            semester or school year. In no case will the educator’s position with the
            district be held for more than (one) 1 year.

     20-2-5 Extended Personal Illness Leave. Any educator who suffers from a serious
            medical condition and such condition extends beyond accumulated sick
            leave allowable, will be granted a leave (provided all eligibility requirements
            are met) of absence of up to one (1) year without pay or increment.

            20-2-5-1 A request for such leave must be accompanied by a statement
                     from an attending physician that such leave is medically
                     necessary.

            20-2-5-2 Request for such leave must also be approved by the Department
                     of Human Resources. An external consultant may be used, but
                     the District will make the final decision.

            20-2-5-3 The educator will remain as part of their school staff while on
                     leave. The vacated position will be filled using a placeholder or a
                     long-term substitute. In no case will the teacher’s position with
                     the district be held for more than one (1) year.

20-3 Extended Personal Illness Leave and Coverage by Short and Long-Term
     Disability Insurance.

     20-3-1 Short-term disability insurance is available to certain members of Colorado
            PERA. Certain rules & restrictions apply. See www.copera.org for more
            information.

     20-3-2 Long-Term Disability is available through Denver Public Schools to a
            full-time contract employee or long-term substitute teacher assigned to a
            vacant position with an expected duration of at least 16 days.




                                        79 of 137
     20-3-3 Eligibility waiting period: Full time employees are eligible for this benefit
            upon completion of three months of continuous service. Additionally, you
            must be off work due to disability for 3 months before payments begin (if
            approved). See http://thecommons.dpsk12.org/benefits to review the Long
            term disability insurance handbook.

     20-3-4 Employees approved for short or long-term disability insurance will need to
            do so concurrently with FMLA and/or an extended personal illness leave
            as described in item 3 above. In no case will an educator’s position with
            the district be held for more than one (1) year.

20-4 Non-Medical Leaves of Absence.

     Certain leaves for non-medical reasons are available to eligible employees upon
     request and approval from the Office of Talent (Human Resources).

    20-4-1 Association Activities Leave. The District agrees that up to three (3)
           educators designated by the Association may, upon request, be granted a
           leave of absence for the duration of their term, without pay, for the purpose
           of engaging in Association activities, local, state, or national.

            a. Upon return from such leave, an educator will be considered as if
               actively employed by the District during the leave, and will be placed on
               the salary schedule at the level the educator would have achieved if the
               educator had remained actively employed during the period of
               absence.

            b. When educator indicate in writing, at the time of application for leave,
               that it is their desire, every reasonable effort will be made to return them
               to their vacated assignment. This provision applies only when leave is
               for up to one (1) full school year.

     20-4-2 Military Leave. Leave for military personnel will be handled in accordance
            with The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act
            of 1994 (USERRA). As a matter of course the following will apply to all
            employees utilizing leave under USERRA:

            a. Employees who are inducted into the U.S. Armed Forces or who are
               reserve members of the U.S. Armed Forces or state militia groups will
               be granted leaves of absence for military service, training or other
               obligations in compliance with state and federal laws.

            b. These employees may use accrued vacation leave but are not required
               to do so.




                                       80 of 137
      c. At the conclusion of the leave, employees generally have the right to
         return to the same position held prior to the leave or to positions with
         equivalent seniority, pay and benefits.

      d. Employees are requested to notify their supervisors as soon as they are
         aware of the military obligation. Generally, an employee retains a
         USERRA right to re-employment as long as the individual’s cumulative
         length of military service does not exceed five years.

      e. Questions regarding military leave policy, applicable state and federal
         laws and continuation of benefits should contact Human Resources.
         Additional information can also be found at:
         http://www.dol.gov/elaws/vets/userra/mainmenu.asp

20-4-3 General Leave. General leave of absence may be granted to a
       non-probationary educator without pay, increment, or benefits when such
       teacher identifies circumstances, which may require an extended absence
       from the District.

      a. A reasonable basis for general leave not covered by other leave of
         absence provisions must be provided during the time of application.
         Reasons for a general leave of absence could include the following:

          ● Elective Office Leave

          ● Travel, Study or Research Leave

          ● Corporate Internship Leave

          ● *Overseas Dependent Schools Leave: Upon return, the educator
            shall be placed on the appropriate step of the salary schedule as
            though the educator had remained actively employed during the
            period of absence.

          ● ACTION Programs Leave (Peace Corps, Vista, etc.) Upon return
            from such leave, an educator will be placed on the salary schedule
            at the level the teacher would have achieved had the educator
            remained actively employed during the period of absence

      b. Applications for general leave of absence must be filed by the date
         established by the Office of Talent (Human Resources) for making such
         an application, except in case of extreme emergency.

      c. General leave of absence will be for one (1) semester or one (1) year.
         Return from such leave can be only at the beginning of a semester.




                                 81 of 137
             d. The educator will remain as part of their school staff while on leave.
                The vacated position will be filled using a placeholder or a long-term
                substitute for the remainder of the semester or school year. In no case
                will the educator’s position be held for more than one school year.

20-5 Additional Extended Leave Conditions. The following conditions shall apply to all
       extended leaves of absence:

         a. All requests for extended leaves of absence will be applied for and granted
            in writing through the Department of Human Resources.

         b. The time spent on extended leaves of absence shall not be counted towards
            the requisite probationary period for obtaining non-probationary educators
            status.

         c. No combination of leaves of absence shall exceed one (1) year.

         d. Educators shall continue to accrue seniority in the District while on approved
            extended leaves, except that seniority shall not accrue while an educator is
            on general leave.

         e. Except to the extent required pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act
            (FMLA), employee benefits will not be provided to an educator while on an
            unpaid extended leave of absence.

                            Article 21 - Association Rights

21-1 The Board recognizes the Association as the official organization to represent
     educators.

     21-1-1 The District will grant a leave of absence in one-year increments to the
            President of the Association during the President's term in office. On an
            annual basis, the Association shall remit to the District the amount
            commensurate with salary and benefit costs of employing a replacement
            educator. The President shall continue to receive full salary, benefits and all
            other entitlements while on such leave. At the conclusion of the term of
            office, the President shall have the same return to duty rights as stated in
            Article 20.

     21-1-2 The Association President or their designee may visit schools for a specific
            purpose after notification to the office of the principal about the general
            purpose of the visit.

     21-1-3 Educator organizations may utilize school facilities for meetings before or
            after the school day by making advance arrangements through the Office of
            Facility Use and pursuant to the same conditions as other Community



                                        82 of 137
             organizations. Educator organizations do not have to pay for the use of the
             building before or after school hours if they furnish their own security and
             janitorial services.

     21-1-4 The Association has the right to place notices, circulars, and other material
            on designated bulletin boards and in educators’ mailboxes.

             a. Such notices, etc. must be consistent with applicable legal guidelines
                and Board policy.

             b. An information copy of distributed notices, circulars, and other material
                shall be provided to the principal at the time of posting or distribution.

     21-1-5 The Association has the right to use the school mail.

     21-1-6 The Association has the right to have an Association Representative at
            each school. The Association Representative shall have the right to carry
            on Association business when it does not interfere with their normal
            teaching responsibilities.

     21-1-7 On the first business day of August and September, the District shall
            provide to the Association a list of all new hires and transfers, including the
            name, current address, District e-mail address, and phone number.

     21-1-8 The Association may use the District’s e-mail system to send out e-mails to
            the Association membership which pertain only to the bargaining unit, and
            which are in compliance with the District policies governing the use of
            electronic mail and internet systems.

21-2 Active Membership. At any time, employees in the bargaining unit wishing to
     become members of the Association may authorize such deduction by filing with
     the District through the office of the Association, a signed and dated Denver
     Classroom Teachers Association Salary Deduction Authorization Form authorizing
     the District to deduct from the monthly earnings of each bargaining unit employee
     and to remit to the Treasurer of the Association, an amount equal to one-twelfth
     (1/12) of the dues required for membership in the organization or organizations
     specified in Article 21-3-6 below, unless that employee has revoked membership
     using the process outlined in the Denver Classroom Teacher Association
     Membership Form (“Form”).

      The form shall include a waiver of all right and claim against the Board, the
      District, and the officers and agents thereof, for moneys deducted and remitted in
      accordance with the above paragraph; said deductions and remittances shall
      continue from year to year, unless educators notify the District through the
      Association office and on an appropriate form, that they desire to discontinue or to
      change such authorization.



                                        83 of 137
       21-2-1 Employees who have revoked membership may, at any time, become
              members of the Association by filing with the District through the office of
              the Association, a signed and dated Denver Classroom Teachers
              Association Salary Deduction Authorization Form authorizing the District to
              deduct from their monthly earnings and to remit the Treasurer of the
              Association, an amount equal to one-twelfth (1/12) of the dues required for
              membership in the organization or organizations specified in Article
              21-3-6.

       21-2-2 When Association members have no earnings due them for the month, or
              do not have sufficient earnings after all other deductions and/or
              withholdings to cover any part of the deductions, then no deductions (or a
              partial deduction) will be made for those educators for that month. Any
              Association member who resigns from the District after May 31 will have
              the full remaining balance of annual dues (through August 31) deducted
              from their last salary check, with the exception of those members who
              retire from the District.

       21-2-3 The Association agrees to hold the District harmless from any action
              growing out of those deductions and commenced by any educator against
              the Board or the District, and assumes full responsibility for the disposition
              of the funds so deducted once they have been turned over to the treasurer
              of the Association.

       21-2-4 A service charge of ten cents ($0.10) per month per individual educator
              authorization shall be retained by the District to help defray costs of
              making such deduction.

       21-2-5 Upon issuance of any employment contract to any member of the
              Association bargaining unit, the District will provide the new employee with
              a copy of the Agreement and information concerning responsibilities
              identified under this Article.

       21-2-6 The District agrees to deduct from educators’ salaries an amount to cover
              dues for the Association, the Colorado Education Association (CEA) and
              the National Education Association (NEA), and to transmit the amount so
              authorized to the Treasurer of the Association.

21-3 Association Leave. The Association shall be entitled to one hundred fifty
     (150) full days per year for conducting business and/or joint District/Association
     projects and committee assignments. The Association shall reimburse the District
     at the daily substitute rate of pay for each day in excess of one hundred fifty (150),
     up to a combined total of two hundred fifty (250) days.




                                         84 of 137
                         Article 22 - Job Sharing and Half-Time

22-1 Job sharing, or converting from a full-time employee to a half-time employee, may
     be requested by regularly assigned full-time equivalent educators who wish to work
     only half-time. Procedures for assignment to a job sharing or half-time position will
     be available upon request from the Department of Human Resources.

      22-1-1 Application for a job sharing or half-time position must be made in writing to
             the Department of Human Resources by the published date.

      22-1-2 Educators wishing to job share must find another educator who also wishes
             to job share.

      22-1-3 Job share and half-time assignments, when possible, shall be for one (1)
             year at a time.

      22-1-4 Salary, benefits, accrued service and other employment entitlements shall
             be half their usual value, as applicable.

      22-1-5 To be effective, the job sharing or half-time assignments must be approved
             by the CSC at the school to which the educators are assigned.

22-2 Educators will be notified of placement during the educator staffing process.

                            Article 23 - Professional Behavior

23-1 Educators are expected to comply with rules, regulations, and directions adopted
     by the Board or its representatives which are not inconsistent with the express
     provisions of this Agreement, except that an educator may refuse to carry out an
     order which reasonably threatens the educator’s physical safety.

23-2 Educators are expected to use appropriate channels of communication for
     comments, suggestions, grievances and other professional matters. Such
     channels include normal administrative channels, the grievance procedure, CSC,
     teacher organization representatives, and negotiations. No reprisals may be taken
     against educators, CSC, SLT and Personnel Committee members due to the
     exercise of the responsibilities of these positions.

23-3 The District affirms the principles that educators have the full rights and
     responsibilities of citizenship and that an educator’s private life and activities are
     not an appropriate concern of the District, except to the extent that they detract
     from the effective accomplishment of the educator’s professional duties or are
     grounds for dismissal under Colorado statutes.

      23-3-1 Educators have the right, except as otherwise provided by law, to engage
             in political activity, to campaign on behalf of candidates for public office,



                                          85 of 137
              and to themselves seek, campaign for, and hold public office. However,
              these activities must be conducted outside school hours and must not
              interfere with the effective accomplishment of the educator’s professional
              duties.

23-4 The District and the Association affirm that diverse perspectives are part of a
     democratic society. All employees are expected to act in accordance with the
     values of the District. All employees are encouraged to identify and respond to
     microaggressions, dilemmas regarding ethics, integrity and or equity through
     difficult conversations which may not be comfortable. Discussions amongst
     employees are appropriate, valued, and serve as a tool to counter implicit bias.

23-5 The Board, educators, and administrators encourage one another to exemplify the
     highest standards of personal and professional excellence and to become
     outstanding role models for all students.

23-6 Every educator and administrator is expected to exhibit sensitivity to ethnic-minority
     persons and to promote the success of students from multi­cultural/multi-ethnic
     backgrounds.

23-7 Every educator and administrator is expected to treat all members of the school
     community with dignity and respect regardless of sexual orientation, gender
     identity, or transgender status. Students and staff have the right to be addressed by
     their preferred pronouns, and no educator or administrator shall knowingly refuse
     to address a student or staff member by their preferred pronoun.

23-8 Any alleged abuses of principal authority in the Personnel Committee or SLT
     process shall be reported to the Association or Instructional Superintendent or
     designee. The Association and Instructional Superintendent or designee will review
     and address these allegations.

                  Article 24 - Controversial Issues in the Classroom

24-1 Controversial issues are defined as those problems, subjects, or questions about
     which there are significant differences of opinion, for which there are no easy
     resolutions, and discussions of which generally create strong feelings among
     people.

      24-1-1 Although there may be disagreements over what the facts are and what
             they mean, subjects usually become controversial issues because of
             differences in the values people use in applying the facts.

      24-1-2 Controversy is inherent in the democratic way of life. It is essential
             therefore, that the study and discussion of controversial issues have an
             important place in education for citizenship in a free society. Students
             develop into free citizens with informed loyalty to democracy only through



                                        86 of 137
              the process of examining evidence, facts, and differing viewpoints; through
              the exercise of freedom of thought and moral choice; and through the
              making of responsible decisions. These procedures are characteristic of,
              and essential to, a free society.

24-2 Educators have the right and responsibility to teach about controversial issues.

      24-2-1 Educators have the responsibility to select issues for study and discussion
             which contribute to the attainment of course objectives, and to make
             available to students materials concerning the various aspects of the
             issues.

      24-2-2 Educators have the obligation to be as objective as possible and to present
             the several sides of an issue fairly.

      24-2-3 Although educators have the right to express their own viewpoints and
             opinions, they do not have the right to unduly influence or indoctrinate
             students to their own views.

24-3 Students have the right and need, under competent guidance and instruction, to
     study issues appropriate to their interests, experiences and abilities. They must
     have access to relevant information, and they have the obligation to examine
     carefully all sides of an issue. Students have the right to form and express their
     own opinions without jeopardizing their positions in the classroom or in the school.

24-4 Academic Freedom.

       24-4-1 The parties seek to educate young people in the democratic tradition, to
              foster a recognition of individual freedom and social responsibility, to
              inspire meaningful awareness of the respect for the Constitution.

       24-4-2 Freedom of individual conscience, association and expression will be
              encouraged, and fairness in procedures will be observed both to
              safeguard the legitimate interests of the schools and to exhibit by
              appropriate examples the basic objectives of a democratic society as set
              forth in the Constitutions of the United States and of the State of Colorado.

       24-4-3 The final responsibility in the determination of the above rests by law with
              the Board.

                             Article 25 - Substitute Teachers

25-1 Adequate Numbers of Substitute Teachers. The District agrees to maintain a list
     of qualified persons sufficient to serve as substitutes for regular teachers who may
     be absent on any given work day. The District will continue to work toward
     increasing its fill rate for substitutes in order to protect teachers’ planning time and



                                         87 of 137
     decrease the requirements for teachers to cover other classrooms. Principals
     should endeavor to respect reasonable requests from teachers when they cannot
     cover a classroom or assignment on a particular day. If, however, no other
     alternative is available and the teacher must cover the class or assignment, the
     principal will work with the teacher to address the challenge created by the
     assignment. Retired teachers from DPS may request to be placed on the list of
     substitutes.

               Article 26 - Benefits Allowance and Benefits Programs

26-1 Benefits Allowance. The District shall provide an HMO plan option for at least the
     first three years of this Agreement. The District shall provide educators with a
     benefits allowance as a part of their total compensation package, consistent with
     the conditions in 26-1-1. The purpose of the benefits allowance is to provide
     educators with a portion of total compensation that can be used to purchase
     benefits choices selected by the Benefits Board and contracted for by the Board of
     Education. The long-term goal of the District and the Association is to provide
     educators with a benefits allowance that plays a significant role in enhancing the
     District’s competitive position in attracting and retaining educators.

      26-1-1 The District shall provide all educators based on FTE on a prorated basis
             with a benefits allowance of $422.17 per month. Educators working less
             than full time will receive the benefits allowance prorated by their full time
             equivalency (FTE). Effective July 1, 2018 all new employees to the
             bargaining unit must purchase one of the District’s major medical plans in
             order to be eligible to receive a benefits allowance. Any savings resulting
             from this change to the benefits allowance structure that starts in 2018 will
             be applied to reduce future health insurance and other benefit costs.
             Using these savings, beginning with the benefits year starting July 1, 2018,
             the District will decrease the premiums for Employee Plus Children and
             Family coverage by at least $1200 annually ($100/month) on top of the
             $750 a year ($62.50/month) that the District is currently subsidizing these
             premiums. Therefore, the total subsidy for these plans will be at least
             $1950 annually. Educators may find per paycheck medical rates here.

26-2 Governance and Administration of Benefits Programs. A Benefits Board will
     administer and govern the group health and life insurance programs, disability
     insurance programs, tax sheltered annuities, flexible-spending accounts, and
     guidelines for using the benefits allowance.

      26-2-1 The Benefits Board will be responsible for any and all benefits programs
             assigned to it by this contract, and shall make every effort to provide
             programs in the best interest of both the District and its employees. The
             Benefits Board is charged with containing the cost of health insurance
             premiums through cooperative efforts, education of employees, and
             consultation with actuaries and health care provider programs.



                                        88 of 137
26-2-2 Composition. The Benefits Board will be composed of four (4)
       representatives of the District, four (4) representatives of the DCTA, and
       representatives elected from the following groups:

           ● Denver Association of Educational Office Professionals (1 vote)
           ● Communication Workers of America (1 vote)
           ● Denver Federation of Paraprofessionals (2 votes)
           ● Denver Federal Paraprofessionals and Nutrition Service Employees
             (1 vote)
           ● Facility Managers Association (1 vote)
           ● Amalgamated Transit Union, Local 1563 (1 vote)
           ● Vocational Teachers Federation of Denver, Local 203 (1 vote)
           ● DPS Association of Building and Grounds Personnel (1 vote)
           ● Denver School Leaders Association (1 vote)

           ● Colorado Federation of School Safety Professionals (1 vote)

26-2-3 Operating Rules. The Benefits Board shall jointly adopt rules pertaining to
       their operation. Such rules shall be a matter of public record and shall not
       conflict with this Agreement in any way.

       26-2-3-1 The Benefits Board shall develop procedures for election of its
                members. Individuals elected to this position shall serve a
                three-year term. Elections should take place in December.

       26-2-3-2 Quorum. Not less than ten (10) representatives shall constitute a
                quorum for the conduct of business. Notification shall be given to
                all members of the Benefits Board of the dates, times, and places
                of its meetings at least two (2) weeks in advance.

       26-2-3-3 Consensus. At each meeting where decisions must be made by
                the Benefits Board, an attempt shall be made to achieve
                consensus of all voting members. If consensus cannot be
                achieved, the matter shall be referred to the Superintendent to
                decide.

26-2-4 Subcommittee on Tax Sheltered Annuities. Tax Sheltered Annuity (TSA)
       products offered by the District shall have the approval of the Benefits
       Board’s Subcommittee, which includes the Manager of Employee Benefits.
       The District shall contract an outside firm to conduct an annual analysis of
       all current TSA products and products from companies seeking approval.
       The results of the analysis shall be made available to all educators.



                                  89 of 137
26-3 Group Life Insurance and Long Term Disability Program. The present group life
     insurance program of the District will be continued for educators and the District will
     pay the full cost of premiums for educators, including group long-term disability
     insurance.

26-4 Liability Insurance Program. Liability insurance coverage shall be provided to
     each educator and costs of such coverage shall be paid by the District. The terms
     and conditions of such coverage shall be provided to the Association.

26-5 The District shall provide an IRS 125 plan to allow pre-tax deductions such as
     flexible spending accounts for child care, care of the elderly, health care
     reimbursement accounts, and dependent insurance including health, dental and
     vision coverages.

             Article 27 - Other Benefits Provided to Teachers and SSPs

27-1 Compensation of Newly Hired Educators. Educators newly hired by the District
     will be paid for up to thirty (30) hours of orientation days under Article 8-1-1. Such
     payment will be based on the educator in-service education rate.

      27-1-1 The District shall seek advice from the Association in the development of
              new educator pre-service, induction and in-service programs.

      27-1-2 All educators required to participate in the Induction Program will be paid at
             the in-service rate specified in the hourly and daily rates schedule.

27-2 Incentives for National Board Certification.

      27-2-1 The District will support up to five (5) candidates for National Board
              Certification with a grant of $1,267 each. The Association will support up
              to five (5) candidates for National Board Certification who are members of
              the Association with a grant of $633 each.

27-3 Compensation for Unused Sick Leave. The Sick Leave Annuity Plan begun for
      educator in 1980 will be continued unless modified pursuant to Article 6. Effective
      September 1, 1994, each educator electing retirement will be provided
      compensation for accumulated sick leave days as follows:

       27-3-1 When the educator has met the requirements for retirement in the District,
              that educator shall be eligible for compensation for accumulated sick
              leave.

       27-3-2 Educators will be compensated for accrued sick leave at a rate of their
              current annual salary x .0015 for each day (one day = 8 hours of sick
              leave) of accrued sick leave. Days paid out shall not exceed the work year.




                                         90 of 137
              Educator’s seeking a Sick Leave Payout Estimate may utilize the Sick
              Leave Payout Calculator. The calculator is for informative purposes only.

       27-3-3 Payment Options. Upon retirement, educators may choose one of four
               options for payment of their compensation for unused sick leave, subject
               to provisions of the IRS code:

                    ● Single sum payment;
                    ● Payment in equal thirds over a three year consecutive period
                      beginning with the first year of retirement;
                    ● Deferring the unused sick leave payout into a 403(b) plan, 401(k)
                      plan or other approved plan;
                    ● Placement of the unused sick leave amount into a 503(c)(9) trust
                      to subsidize future health insurance costs for the employee.

                27-3-3-1 The District and the Association shall coordinate efforts to
                          communicate information with respect to payment options to
                          educators.

                27-3-3-2 Simple Trust. By January 1, 2004, the District and the
                          Association shall establish a Simple Trust for the purpose of
                          holding jointly managed fund contributions. A board
                          composed of two (2) educators from the Benefits Board
                          appointed by the DCTA President, and two (2) administrators
                          from the Benefits Board appointed by the Superintendent,
                          shall govern the trust.

27-4 Educators’ Education Fund. The Educator Education Fund of Three Hundred
     Thousand Dollars ($300,000) will be continued unless modified pursuant to Article
     6. The fund will operate as a trust fund and the interest will be available for
     teachers to further their education, consistent with District objectives. The
     guidelines for application and awarding scholarships will be developed by a joint
     committee with equal representation from the Association and appointments by the
     Superintendent, and the guidelines will be sent to the Superintendent for final
     approval.

       27-4-1 Educators will only be reimbursed for courses relevant to the District’s
              educational mission, including preparation and/or assessments associated
              with meeting the standards of a highly qualified teacher under No Child
              Left Behind. The committee will include in its guidelines standards of
              relevancy for reimbursement.

       27-4-2 The District will provide clerical support to implement the committee’s
              decisions. Such clerical support will not exceed twenty (20) hours per
              month.


                                        91 of 137
27-5 Transportation Allowance.

       27-5-1 Educators whose duties require travel between two (2) or more schools
             shall be reimbursed at the IRS standard mileage rate for the use of their
             automobile.

       27-5-2 Educators authorized transportation allowance are required to carry bodily
              injury automobile liability insurance in accordance with state law. An
              up-to-date proof of insurance must be provided to the approving
              supervisor in order to be eligible for this program.

       27-5-3 The District agrees to add educators to its automobile liability insurance
              coverage when these educators are required to transport students as part
              of the course and scope of employment. The District will add these
              educators by job description or name. Proof of underlying insurance is
              required from each authorized educator at the level of One Hundred
              Thousand Dollars ($100,000)/person, Three Hundred Thousand Dollars
              ($300,000)/occurrence and Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000)/property.
              Each authorized teacher will receive a thirty-dollar ($30.00) stipend per
              month in addition to mileage.

       27-5-4 Educators authorized transportation allowance but not owning or driving
              an automobile are reimbursed for actual bus fare expenditures.

27-6 Early Notification of Retirement. Any educator who is eligible for retirement
     benefits and submits a retirement request effective the end of the school year for
     action by the Board at its April legislative meeting shall be eligible for a severance
     pay stipend of One Thousand, Two Hundred Dollars ($1,200.00) payable at the
     time of retirement. The application deadline is February 1. The Association and
     District may mutually agree to extend this date in extenuating circumstances.

27-7 The District will provide to DCTA, prior to the start of negotiations, an accounting of
     vacancy/turnover savings as used in the budget estimates according to a
     methodology agreed to by the District and DCTA.

                         Article 28 - Extra Duty Compensation

28-1 In accordance with the provisions for work week and work year found in Articles 8-1
     and 8-2, any time an educator agrees to perform work for the District beyond the
     workweek or work year, that educator will be compensated as described in this
     Article.

28-2 Hourly and Daily Rates. The District will pay the hourly and daily rates in the
     negotiated schedule that can be accessed here or on the DPS Employee




                                         92 of 137
      Associations website. All rates will increase consistent with the Financial
      Agreement.

      28-2-1 Principals have the right to ask other educators and appropriate personnel
             to supervise activities for compensation if they are unable to secure enough
             educators from their own building.

28-3 Activity Salaries. The District will pay the activity salaries in the negotiated
     schedule that can be accessed here or on the DPS Employee Associations
     website. All rates will increase consistent with the Financial Agreement.

       28-3-1

       Schedule 1: Forensics Director (Senior High), Band Director (Senior High), Choir
                   Director (Senior High), Dramatics Director, Dance Director,
                   Cheerleading Director

       Schedule 2: Head Football, Head Basketball, Head Wrestling, Head Volleyball

       Schedule 3: Head Baseball, Head Softball, Head Track

       Schedule 4: Head Girls Golf, Head Girls Tennis, Head Swimming, Head Cross
                   Country, Head Gymnastics, Head Soccer, Assistant Basketball,
                   Assistant Football, Assistant Wrestling, Head Field Hockey, Head
                   Lacrosse, Assistant Volleyball

       Schedule 5: Assistant Baseball, Assistant Softball, Assistant Track, Assistant
                   Swimming, Assistant Gymnastics, Assistant Soccer, Assistant Field
                   Hockey, Assistant Lacrosse, Head Boys Golf, Head Boys Tennis

       Schedule 6: Assistant Boys Golf, Assistant Boys Tennis

       Schedule 7: Elementary and Middle School Vocal and Instrumental Music
                   Directors (3 concerts/year), and Elementary, Middle and High School
                   Art Teachers (3 shows/year), Middle School Dramatics Director (2
                   plays/year), Middle School Forensics Director (3 meets/year)

       Schedule 10: Denver School of the Arts and Kunsmilller School of the Arts
                    performing arts, music, and design technology arts staff, stipends

       Schedule 12: JROTC Instructors

       28-3-2 When an educator moves from an assistant coach to a head coach in the
              same sport, the following season the educator shall be advanced to the
              same step on the new schedule.




                                         93 of 137
      28-3-3 Every year educators shall be granted one step for each year of
             experience in the same activity.

      28-3-4 Teachers newly hired to head coach positions from head coach positions
             outside the District after August 31, 2000 shall be granted one-year
             experience for each year of outside experience. Educators newly hired to
             head coach positions from assistant coach positions outside the District
             shall be granted one-year experience for each two years outside
             experience.

28-4 Representation on Athletic Board of Control. The DPS Coaches Association
     shall name one representative to the District Athletic Board of Control; such
     representative is to be a voting member of said Board.

28-5 Calendar of Activities. Principals, after consulting with the SLT, should establish
     the school calendar of extra-curricular activities and should determine which
     activities will be held and how many persons are necessary to perform such
     functions. It shall be the function of the CSC and the principal to determine the
     fund dispersal resulting from the allocations under this Article.

28-6 Paid Class Coverage. If an educator is directed to use their planning period to
     cover a class due to a lack of substitute, the school shall pay the educator for the
     lost preparation period at the negotiated hourly educator rate.

      28-6-1 A total of $200 per day will be prorated amongst educators who take on
             additional students due to a lack of substitute in proportion of students
             added to their class.

      28-6-2 The educator’s school day may be extended the appropriate amount of
             time.

28-7 Paid Committee Participation. Educators in the following committees will be
     eligible for an annual $400 stipend:
                 ● Collaborative School Committee (one educator elected);
                 ● School Leadership Teams (1 appointed educator, Association
                    Representative and 3 educators elected);
                 ● Personnel Committee (3 educators elected);
                 ● Department Leadership Teams (1 appointed educator, Functional
                    Association Representative, 3 educator representatives elected)
                 ● Educational Sign Language Interpreter Department Leadership
                    Team (3 educators elected)
                 ● LEAP Collaborative Committee (7 appointed educators);
                 ● SSP GPS Collaborative Committee;
                 ● Equity Collaborative Committee.




                                        94 of 137
28-8 Educators in the following Teacher Leader Roles will receive the following
     stipends:

                             Role                   Stipend               Pay Out

                     Senior Team Lead               $5,500               Bi-weekly

                     Team Lead                      $3,300               Bi-weekly

                     Team Specialist                $1,650             Twice per-year

                     New Teacher                     $880              Twice per year
                     Ambassador

                     Regional Team                  $1,650             Twice per year
                     Specialists


28-9 Teachers within CTE and CTE ProTech Instructors are eligible to receive a $500
     annual stipend for one of the state approved CTE programs. Eligibility for stipends
     will be consistent with the CTSO Advisor Stipend Requirements outlined here.

28-10 Special Education Teachers and SSPs approved by direct supervisor and/or
      principal to complete compensatory services beyond the forty (40) hour work week
      will be paid at the individual’s hourly rate.

       Article 29 – Specialized Service Providers and Whole Child Supports

The District and the Association recognize the valuable contribution that Specialized
Service Providers (SSPs) bring to our schools and to improving student achievement.
Therefore, the Board and the Association are committed to providing schools with
multidisciplinary teams, workloads, and staffing ratios that lead the Denver metropolitan
area and support evidence-based practices for all student services.

29-1 Whole Child Supports

      29-1-1 The District and the Association also affirm their commitment to the
             education of the “Whole Child.” It is understood by both parties that the
             social and emotional growth of our students is of critical importance to
             achieving the success of our students, in the classroom and in life, and
             that the Whole Child must be considered in every regard. Toward that
             end, the 2016 Whole Child Mill Levy dollars will be used to support the
             socially and emotionally intelligent component of the Whole Child
             definition.

      29-1-2 Whole Child Mill Levy dollars can be used by schools to add School Social
             Workers, School Psychologists, School Nurses, or Restorative Practices


                                        95 of 137
            Coordinators, to expand mental health services, evidence-based social
            emotional learning curriculum and instruction, programs focused on
            building a school climate that fosters positive social-emotional outcomes,
            or a combination of these varying types of support.

     29-1-3 The District and the Association will jointly convene a Whole Child Task
            Force charged with determining and documenting best practices in:

               ● usage of Whole Child Mill Levy funds,
               ● school schedules that provide appropriate access to physical activity
                 and electives,
               ● social and emotional learning and
               ● mental and physical health and nutrition
               ● equitable access to technology
               ● providing family life and sexual education classes

            The Whole Child Task Force will annually determine areas of focus for the
            year, objectives and meeting cadence at the beginning of each school
            year. The Whole Child Task Force will report regularly to the DCTA
            president and Superintendent on their progress and recommendations on
            possible changes to Board Policy and/or District practice.

            The Task Force shall be comprised of 15 members: Five (5) appointed by
            the District, five (5) appointed by the Association, and five (5) members of
            the community jointly appointed by the Association and the District.

29-2 Employment of SSPs.

     29-2-1 Hiring

            29-2-1-1 Positions posted for SSPs shall indicate whether the position is
                     school-based or centrally-based.

     29-2-2 Reductions

            29-2-2-1 Centrally-based SSPs:

                      29-2-2-1-1 The department head selects an interview panel that
                                 will consist of a minimum of one department
                                 supervisor and one individual endorsed in the area
                                 of reduction but who is not impacted by the
                                 reduction.

                      29-2-2-1-2 The interview panel will agree upon interview criteria
                                 that will enable them to retain the best candidates
                                 for the available positions.



                                      96 of 137
                        29-2-2-1-3 The interview panel will attempt to reach consensus
                                   on the candidate most suitable to be reduced. If the
                                   interview panel is unable to reach consensus, the
                                   department head will decide which candidate(s) will
                                   be reduced.

              29-2-2-2 School-based SSPs: This process is the same as the process
                       followed for educators under Article 13 of the Agreement.

              29-2-2-3 SSPs who are reduced will be notified that they should apply for
                       new positions in the District. If an SSP is not hired into a new
                       position prior to the conclusion of the current position, the SSP
                       will not be continued into the subsequent school year, but will be
                       immediately eligible for rehire. Reduced school-based SSPs
                       who apply for centrally-based SSP positions prior to the
                       conclusion of their current position will be given two guaranteed
                       interviews for centrally-based SSP positions in which they apply
                       and are qualified.

29-3 Continuing Service Status and Dismissal Protections.

      29-3-1 SSPs will receive annual contracts and any termination during those
             annual contracts shall only be for just cause.

      29-3-2 After an SSP has completed three years of satisfactory or
             effective performance, the SSP shall be entitled to a hearing with an
             impartial hearing officer if they are recommended for dismissal, consistent
             with the procedures provided in Administrative Policy GDQD and
             GDQD-R.

      29-3-3 Material changes to procedures in Administrative Policy
             GDQD and GDQD-R impacting educators will be negotiated per Article 6
             with DCTA prior to implementation.

                                Article 30 - Innovation

Part 1: Innovation Plan Application Process

30-1 Notice to DCTA
     30-1-1 Within five (5) business days after the School Leadership Team (or
            equivalent governing body if Article 5-5 was waived in the case of renewal),
            school administrators, or Collaborative School Committee determines that
            its mission, vision, and values would be supported by the flexibilities
            provided by innovation status, the School Leadership Team (or equivalent



                                       97 of 137
             governing body) or District staff shall send written notification to DCTA by
             emailing the DCTA president at DCTAPresident@Coloradoea.org of its
             intent to apply for innovation status or renew its Innovation Plan.
30-2 Innovation Plan Development
     30-2-1 Innovation Plan Applications shall address the requirements of the
            Innovation Schools Act listed in C.R.S §22-32.5-104, district policy, and this
            article. The Innovation Plan Application will identify flexibilities that a school
            seeks to implement, rationale for flexibilities, the collective bargaining
            agreement waivers associated with these flexibilities (if any), applicable
            replacement language, and the impact of these flexibilities to members of
            the collective bargaining agreement.

     30-2-2 In guiding the development of an Innovation Plan application, the principal
            will collaborate with the School Leadership Team (or equivalent governing
            body) and other stakeholders to identify (1) “innovations,” or new
            approaches that intended to increase the school’s ability to achieve its
            mission, and (2) the specific waivers from district policy, DCTA collective
            bargaining agreement provisions, and/or state/laws and regulations that
            are required to give the school the ability to implement the innovations.

     30-2-3 The School Leadership Team (or equivalent governing body) will identify, in
            a consensus model, engagement strategies on how DCTA covered
            employees at the school can participate in the development of the
            Innovation Plan. If the equivalent governing body is unable to reach a
            decision by consensus, the principal shall make a final decision. Possible
            strategies include inviting teachers to information meetings, hosting forums
            to discuss opinions, conducting a survey of all educators, submitting
            anonymous questions to be answered by the School Leadership Team (or
            equivalent governing body) and/or hosting co-facilitated meetings with
            DCTA.

     30-2-4 The DCTA School Association Representative will be designated as the
            liaison between the School Leadership Team (or equivalent governing
            body) and DCTA to solicit and receive ongoing feedback on the
            development of the innovation plan. If the school does not have a DCTA
            School Association Representative, DCTA will appoint a DCTA covered
            employee employed at the school to serve as the liaison. If the equivalent
            governing body does not include a DCTA School Association
            Representative, the DCTA School Association Representative will attend
            the equivalent governing body’s meeting for agenda items related to the
            Innovation Plan Application.



                                         98 of 137
30-3 Election Procedure
     30-3-1 Consent of the Innovation Plan Application shall be based on obtaining the
            approval, by means of a secret ballot vote, of a majority of teachers
            employed at the school. If DCTA collective bargaining agreement waivers
            are included in the Innovation Plan, consent of the Innovation Plan
            Application shall be based on obtaining the approval, by means of a secret
            ballot vote, of sixty percent (60%) of members of the collective bargaining
            agreement at the school.

     30-3-2 The Office of Talent (Human Resources) will share with the school an
            “Eligible Voting List” of all bargaining unit members assigned to the affected
            school(s). The SLT or equivalent governing body will confirm and indicate
            the number of ballots needed to obtain consent of a majority of teachers
            employed at the school (60% of DCTA covered employees if collective
            bargaining agreement waivers are included in the Innovation Plan).

      30-3-3 The school shall provide a written copy of the final draft Innovation Plan
             and eligible voting list to DCTA and every DCTA covered employee at the
             affected school(s) at least ten (10) work days prior to the beginning of any
             secret ballot election period. Prior to the secret ballot election period, the
             final draft Innovation Plan shall be posted on the school’s website. If there
             are material changes to the final draft of the Innovation Plan during the ten
             (10) work day window, the ten (10) work day timeline will start over and the
             updated final draft Innovation Plan will be sent to the staff and posted on
             the website. A secret ballot election period shall extend two (2) work days
             to allow bargaining unit members to cast their ballot.

      30-3-4 Provision will be made for members of the collective bargaining agreement
             who are out on leave or itinerant teachers during the election period to
             cast a secret ballot.

      30-3-5 Ballots shall be prepared by the School Leadership Team (or equivalent
             governing body) at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the secret
             ballot election period.

      30-3-6 The School Leadership Team will designate election administrator(s) (1-2
             people) that are not in the DCTA bargaining unit and are not in a
             supervisory role at the school.

      30-3-7 The election administrator(s) shall distribute ballots during the election
             period.

      30-3-8 A ballot box/envelope should be used to protect voter privacy.


                                        99 of 137
      30-3-9 Bargaining Unit members shall sign the Eligible Voting List to indicate they
             have submitted their ballot.

      30-3-10 The election administrators will be responsible for
              counting the cast ballots, and ensuring that the number of ballots
              submitted matches the number of signatures on the Eligible Voting List
              following the close of the election period.

      30-3-11 Ballots will be counted at a time and location conducive for all voting
              members, where DCTA representatives, District staff, school staff and
              other interested parties can observe the counting.

30-4 Progress Monitoring
      30-4-1 Each year the SLT or the (equivalent governing body) will gather and
             evaluate data to determine the progress of the Innovation Plan and
             waivers towards the goals identified in the innovation plan.

      30-4-2 The results of the progress monitoring will be shared annually by the
             principal with DCTA covered employees at the Innovation School and
             posted on the school website.

30-5 Hiring into Innovation Schools
      30-5-1 Candidates interviewing for DCTA covered positions within innovation
             schools or in innovation zones shall be provided with a copy of the
             innovation plan inclusive of waivers to the collective bargaining agreement
             and innovation plan replacement language.

      30-5-2 Job postings for DCTA covered positions in innovation schools or
             innovation zones must include a notification that the school is an
             innovation school. Notifications will state: NOTICE TO APPLICANTS:
             THIS VACANCY IS AT A SCHOOL DESIGNATED AS AN “INNOVATION
             SCHOOL.” FOR MORE INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT THE
             SCHOOL AND/OR DCTA.

      30-5-3 This article is designed to be consistent with the general purpose and
             principles outlined in the Innovation Schools Act, as well as consistent with
             federal and state statutes/regulations, CDE Guidelines, and Board
             Policies.

Part 2: Innovation Probationary Status



                                         100 of 137
Context

30-6 District-run innovation schools may, upon the majority vote of their faculty, adopt an
     innovation plan that waives statutory requirements, including the legal
     requirements related to probationary and non-probationary status.

30-7 When a teacher with non-probationary status transfers from a traditional school to
     an innovation school which does not recognize non-probationary status the
     District’s practice is and has been to place the teacher’s non-probationary status in
     “the bubble.” If the teacher subsequently transfers to a traditional school or an
     innovation school that recognizes non-probationary status, the teacher’s
     non-probationary status is removed from the bubble.

30-8 Critically, while a probationary teacher is working for an innovation school, that
     teacher cannot gain non-probationary status – regardless of the number of
     consecutive years of effective ratings they receive. Similarly, while a
     non-probationary teacher is working for an innovation school, that teacher cannot
     lose non-probationary status – regardless of the number of consecutive years of
     less than effective ratings.

Continued Recognition of Innovation Plans

30-9 The District will continue to honor the innovation plans upon which staff voted,
     including but not limited to innovation plans which include statutory waivers of
     TECDA related to non-probationary status.

Tracking Years of Effective Ratings

30-10 The District will begin tracking consecutive years of effective and less than
     effective ratings for teachers who work at innovation schools that do not recognize
     non-probationary status.

30-11 As described in Article 10-2 of the Agreement. "Effective Rating" means an overall
     LEAP End-of-Year Rating of Distinguished or Effective. "Ineffective Rating" means
     an overall LEAP End-of-Year Rating of Not Meeting or Approaching.

30-12 A teacher who works for an innovation school that does not recognize
     non-probationary status who subsequently transfers to a traditional school or an
     innovation school that does recognize non-probationary status will be credited with
     any consecutive years of effective or less than effective ratings they received at
     their previous school(s). For example: A probationary teacher who receives 2
     consecutive years of effective ratings at an innovation school who then transfers to
     a traditional school, will be credited with 2 consecutive years of effective ratings
     and need receive only 1 more          consecutive year of effective ratings to gain
     non-probationary status.




                                        101 of 137
Obtaining Non-Probationary Status

30-13 Consistent with C.R.S 22-63-203, all probationary teachers, including those
      working for an innovation school that does not recognize non-probationary status,
      can gain non-probationary status by receiving three (3) consecutive years of
      effective ratings.

30-14 In cases where a probationary teacher earns non-probationary status while
      working for an innovation school that does not recognize non-probationary status,
      the teacher shall have that status placed in the bubble. If the teacher subsequently
      transfers to a traditional school or an innovation school that recognizes
      non-probationary status, the teacher’s non-probationary status is removed from
      the bubble.

Losing Non-Probationary Status

30-15 Consistent with State Board of Education rules at 1 CCR 301-87 and Article 10-10
      of the DCTA/DPS Agreement, all non-probationary teachers, including those
      working for an innovation school that does not recognize non-probationary status,
      can lose non-probationary status by receiving two (2) consecutive years of less
      than effective ratings.

30-16 In cases where a non-probationary teacher loses non-probationary status while
      working for an innovation school that does not recognize non-probationary status,
      their non-probationary status shall be removed even though it was previously
      placed in the bubble. If the teacher subsequently transfers to a traditional school
      or an innovation school that recognizes non-probationary status, the teacher shall
      have probationary status. Nothing prevents this teacher from earning
      non-probationary status again based on three (3) subsequent and consecutive
      years of effective ratings and having said status be placed in the bubble.

30-17 The teacher shall be entitled the rights and privileges under the law and the
      Agreement to contest the loss of non-probationary status.

Retroactivity

30-18 The modification to District practices, described in paragraphs 30-13 through
      30-17, will apply retroactively. This means that teachers who received three (3)
      consecutive years of effective ratings will be given credit for those years beginning
      the 22-23 SY. To properly implement this system, the Office of Talent (Human
      Resources) will track consecutive years of effective and less than effective ratings
      for innovation teachers from the 17-18 SY through the current school year.

One Year Safe Harbor




                                        102 of 137
30-19 At the conclusion of the 21-22 SY, immediately before this modification to District
      practice goes into effect, the District anticipates that a large number of
      probationary teachers who work at innovation schools that do not recognize
      non-probationary status will receive a third consecutive effective rating which
      would cause them to gain non-probationary status. The District also anticipates
      that a small number of non-probationary teachers who work at innovation schools
      that do not recognize non-probationary status will receive a second less than
      effective rating which would cause them to lose non-probationary status.

30-19 For non-probationary teachers who work at innovation schools that do not
      recognize non-probationary status who receive a second less than effective rating
      for the 21-22 SY only, the District shall provide a one year safe harbor. Teachers
      subject to this safe harbor provision shall not lose their non-probationary status
      following the 21-22 SY and shall retain non-probationary status for the 22-23 SY.
      However, if a teacher subject to this safe harbor provision receives a less than
      effective rating for the 22-23 SY, their non-probationary status shall be lost,
      consistent with State Board of Education rules at 1 CCR 301-87 and Article 10-10
      of the DCTA/DPS Agreement. This Safe Harbor provision does not limit the rights
      of the district to take other personnel actions based on a teacher’s ratings.

30-20 Beginning the 23-24 SY, there shall be no safe harbor provision and all teachers
      will be subject to the same rules for obtaining and losing non-probationary status.

                       Article 31 - Equity in the School District

31-1 The District and Association agree to establish a collaborative committee with
     equal representation of DPS and DCTA. The committee will engage in collaborative
     conversations in an effort to create alignment and cohesion that advances racial
     and educational equity in DPS. The District and Association Collaborative Equity
     Committee agree to:

          ● Honor the importance of our individual and collective journeys related to
            mental, physical and emotional well being of all while engaging in
            conversation and modeling collaboration.
          ● Anchor to the DPS mission, vision, shared core values and the DPS
            Thrives: Strategic Roadmap to frame our outcomes centered on the
            system, the student and the adult experience.
          ● Meet once a month throughout the school year.
          ● A lead from DCTA and the District will co-lead and collaborate on the work.
          ● Representation of committee membership will reflect marginalized groups.
          ● Engage the voices of team members to explore current and future efforts.
          ● Explore a district-wide racial equity analysis tool (which has been in
            development) to ground in when making decisions to address the impacts
            on racial equity, i.e. those related to recruitment, retention efforts,
            professional development, instructional practices.




                                       103 of 137
         ● Explore access to PDU opportunities that extend learning in the area of
           equity and inclusion and expand knowledge of their own racial and cultural
           identity, and the identity of others to cultivate cross-cultural competence by
           taking into account the historical, social and institutional realities we
           experience.

31-2 Professional Development

     31-2-1 The District will continue to work towards the following goals:

                ● Provide access to annual training, including but not limited to, implicit
                  bias, to all educators, including school-based hiring committees
                  regarding the importance of and strategies for increasing staff racial,
                  ethnic and linguistic diversity in an urban school district.

                ● Personnel Committee members will complete annual training on
                  equitable hiring practices prior to serving on such committees.

                ● Educators will have access to PDU opportunities that extend
                  learning in the area of equity and inclusion.

                ● Expand the ReachOne Mentoring program to support novice
                  educators of color through mentorship matches with more
                  experienced educators of color. The Equity Collaborative Committee
                  will discuss a process to prioritize school-based educators for
                  mentorship opportunities.

     31-2-2 All newly hired educators are required to complete
            Modules 1 through 9 of the Equity Experience prior to the start of their
            second school year.

            31-2-2-1 Existing educators as of September 1, 2022
                     are required to complete Modules 1 through 9 of the Equity
                     Experience by the end of the 2023-2024 school year.

31-3 School Resources

     31-3-1 The District agrees to implement the following with respect to District
             policies:

                ● The District will endeavor to develop rich learning opportunities that
                  accurately include and celebrate the contributions and historical
                  relevance of communities of color and historically marginalized
                  communities.




                                       104 of 137
                 ● Bilingual educators shall not be required to serve as translators for
                   the school community in lieu of services provided by the Multicultural
                   Communications Department.

                 ● Schools will work to utilize a rostering process that considers the
                   demographic distribution of students.

                   Article 32 - Balarat Outdoor Education Teachers

With the inclusion of educators that are employed at Balarat Outdoor Education in the
Collective Bargaining Agreement, it is important to recognize the unique differences that
exist between Balarat educators and classroom educators and Special Services
Providers that are governed by the Collective Bargaining Agreement.

32-1 Except as expressly set forth in this article, the terms and conditions of the
    Collective Bargaining Agreement shall apply to Balarat Educators.

32-2 Balarat Collaborative. Balarat Outdoor Education should have a Balarat
     Collaborative, which shall make decisions using the process outlined in Article
     5-5-2, which the exception that if consensus cannot be reached, the matter shall be
     referred to the Balarat Regulatory Cabinet, comprised of the Balarat managers,
     and/or the Balarat Regulatory Cabinet direct report who shall consult with the
     Association prior to making a decision. The Balarat Collaborative will be composed
     of managers, educators and facilitators. Educators and facilitators can vote after
     one year of employment at Balarat. The responsibilities of the Balarat Collaborative
     shall be the same as those of the School Leadership Team as described in Article
     5-5-3.

32-3 Personnel Committee.

      32-3-1 The Balarat Outdoor Education program/staff shall establish a Personnel
              Committee to select candidates for DCTA vacancies at the program.

      32-3-2 The Personnel Committee will be composed of at least one member of the
              Regulatory Cabinet and any educator. Not less than one (1) member of the
              Regulatory Cabinet and two (2) Balarat Educators shall constitute a
              quorum to make decisions during the school year. Notification will be given
              to all members of the Personnel Committee of the dates, times, and places
              of its meeting.

       32-3-3 The Personnel Committee will make decisions by consensus, if possible. If
              the Personnel Committee is unable to reach a decision by consensus, the
              Balarat Regulatory Cabinet shall make an impasse decision.




                                        105 of 137
      32-3-4 The decision or results of the Personnel Committee shall not be
             grievable. The failure to comply with the procedure in this article is subject
             to grievance.

      32-3-5 In determining the most suitable candidate for a vacant position, the
             Personnel Committee shall consider the criteria established in Article
             13-8-6.

       32-3-6 The Personnel Committee shall operate all year consistent with Article
              13-8-7.

32-4 Reduction in Building Staff (RIBS). Article 13-10 is amended as follows: The
     Regulatory Cabinet will be charged with the task of conducting a Reduction in
     Building Staff. All balarat teachers will be in the same consideration group. All
     other provisions of Article 13-10 are applicable.

32-5 Self-Directed Planning Time. Article 8-3-2 is amended as follows: Each
     Balarat Educator shall receive a minimum of three hundred (300) minutes of
     self-directed instructional planning time per week.

32-6 Teacher Facilities. Due to the unique nature of the Balarat Outdoor Educational
     program, the Balarat Collaborative will determine how to implement Article 15
     requirements.

32-7 Evening Meetings. As part of their responsibilities, Balarat Educators may be
     required to host evening parent informational meetings at DPS school sites
     in advance of student residential programs. As such, Balarat Educators will be
     allowed to flex their schedule that planning day to remain within the forty (40) hour
     work week.

32-8 Lunch Periods. The Balarat Collaborative has the ability to modify the duty free
     lunch period depending on the needs of the day and residential excursions with
     students.

32-9 Non-Teaching Duties. Article 8-7 is amended as follows: Non-teaching duties for
     Balarat Teachers include, but are not limited to:

          ● Implementing first aid services
          ● Starting and managing warming fires in shelters,
          ● Setting up and taking down challenge element equipment,
          ● Dormitory supervision,
          ● Supervision of student meal time chores, including dishwashing, table
            setting, and vacuuming,
          ● Snow shoveling,
          ● Basic custodial services,
          ● Maintain and update trails,



                                        106 of 137
          ● Hiking 6 or more miles per day, and
          ● Working outside for extended amount of time in all weather conditions

      32-9-1 Concerns regarding non-teaching duties should be referred to the Balarat
             Collaborative. The Balarat Collaborative will be responsible for reviewing
             non-teaching duties as needed.

      32-9-2 These duties shall not reduce self-directed planning time as guaranteed in
             other sections of the Collective Bargaining Agreement.

32-10 Evaluation. Rather than using the LEAP Framework System, Balarat Educators
      will be evaluated by their managers using the DPS Teacher on Special
      Assignment (“TOSA”) evaluation protocols on an annual basis. The TOSA
      Evaluation Form shall be the official record of the Balarat Educators’ annual
      evaluations.

32-11 Overnight Teaching Responsibilities. As a major portion of their teaching duties,
      Balarat Educators are required to work overnight on the Balarat site for the
      duration of student residential programs. Generally each Balarat Educator will be
      scheduled to work overnight for one (1) or two (2) nights per week throughout the
      normal school year. While student groups are on-site, the Balarat Educator
      assigned to each group shall be required to stay and be on duty for the duration of
      the time that those students are on-site. In the instance that a Balarat Educator
      must leave the site for any reason during a student program, they must get
      approval from a Balarat program manager.

      32-11-1 The following particulars relating to overnight work are agreed to:

                ● Sleeping Accommodations. Balarat Educators shall be provided with
                  a solo sleeping room in the Balarat dormitories to use while working
                  overnight on residential excursions.

                ● Transportation of Students. Article 8-13 is amended as follows:
                  Occasionally a Balarat Educator may be asked to transport an
                  injured or ill student from the Balarat site to a nearby location in
                  order to meet the student’s parent or school staff, such as to
                  Jamestown or Boulder. Consistent with Article 23-1, a teacher may
                  be asked to transport a student exhibiting behavior that could cause
                  harm to self or others or displaying unlawful behavior (e.g.
                  drugs/alcohol). This transportation will be coordinated in accordance
                  with protocols established by the Balarat Collaborative. The protocol
                  will include that two adults shall assist in transporting students when
                  there are enough adults to provide the appropriate level of
                  supervision for all students.




                                       107 of 137
                ● Personal Vehicle on site. Balarat Educators shall maintain access to
                  their personal vehicles on site during excursions and professional
                  developments. Because of this requirement, pursuant to Article 27-5
                  the Lead Balarat Educator or designee shall be reimbursed for travel
                  between the Denver-based Balarat Office location and the Balarat
                  mountain site, and any required Balarat mountain site travel at the
                  standard IRS mileage rate for the use of their automobile.

                ● Emergency School District Closures. Article 8-11 is amended as
                  follows: When weather conditions require closing of the district, there
                  are occasions when Balarat Educators must remain on duty at
                  Balarat when students are on site and the conditions prevent safe
                  transportation of the students back to their schools. In the case that
                  a Balarat Educator must remain at work during a district weather
                  closure day, the Balarat Collaborative shall determine the
                  appropriate manner of compensation for up to eight (8)hours of duty
                  time per closure day. Options to include: comp time or paid time per
                  the negotiated teacher hourly rate in Article 28 in addition to the
                  teacher’s salary.

32-12 Compensation for overnight duty. Balarat Educators shall accrue the equivalent of
      four (4.0) hours of compensatory time for each night spent on duty during a
      student residential program. The Balarat Collaborative shall create a rotating
      weekly instructional schedule that adequately supports this compensatory time for
      Balarat Educators so that this comp time can be utilized on a regularly scheduled
      basis throughout the duration of the standard school year.

      Article 33 - Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps (JROTC) Instructors

33-1 Except as expressly set forth in this Article, the terms and conditions of the
     Collective Bargaining Agreement shall apply to JROTC Instructors covered by this
     agreement.

33-2 Hiring and licensing. JROTC Instructors must be retired members of the armed
     forces. For Denver Public Schools, all the JROTC programs are Army programs
     and therefore all Denver JROTC instructors must be retired Army personnel. A
     retired member of the Army must apply and be certified by U.S. Army
     Headquarters, Cadet Command prior to applying for a JROTC position. This
     procedure includes an application process and an interview by a trained and
     certified interviewer. The application and interview are evaluated at Cadet
     Command and if the candidate is considered to have the attributes required of a
     JROTC instructor, they are provided a document of certification. Once an individual
     is certified, they may apply to any JROTC opening nationwide. The School Board is
     the true hiring official. Once a position is offered, the individual applies to the
     Colorado Department of Education (CDE) for either a License or Authorization.




                                      108 of 137
33-3 Compensation.

     33-3-1 Minimum Instructor Pay: The salary of the JROTC instructors is unique and
            has some key differences from the salary schedule agreed to by DPS and
            DCTA. The JROTC instructor salary is determined by Cadet Command for
            each instructor based on their rank, years in service and retired pay. The
            Army informs the District each year what this salary is and the Army
            reimburses DPS in accordance with AR-145-2. As part of the Minimum Pay
            Pay calculated every year, JROTC instructors will receive the Army Cost of
            Living Adjustment (COLA) and not the DPS COLA. This combination of
            Army pay and District pay is called Minimum Instructor Pay or MIP. Salary
            for DPS JROTC Instructors is calculated at the beginning of the contract
            year utilizing MIP effective at the beginning of the DPS contract year and is
            effective until the next DPS contract year.

     33-3-2 Increase for Successful Evaluation: Each year for the remainder of the
            DCTA Financial Agreement, the District will calculate and pay an increase
            to the instructors commensurate with the difference between the annual
            percentile increase of the MIP and the average negotiated Step and COLA
            increase for teachers following each successful annual evaluation as
            identified in Article 37-2-1.

33-4 ProComp Incentives:

     33-4-1 JROTC Instructors shall be eligible for all incentives under Article 37-4 of
            the DCTA/DPS Agreement.

     33-4-2 Because JROTC instructors are not placed on the steps-and-lanes
            schedule in Article 37, lane movement is not possible. Therefore, JROTC
            instructors shall be eligible for the $2,000 longevity base increase as
            described in Article 37-3-1.

     33-4-3 JROTC instructors are also eligible to receive one $2,000 base increase for
            attaining a qualifying advanced degree.

     33-4-4 JROTC Instructors shall receive a $2,000 base increase for completion of
            18 PDU credits. The $2,000 PDU base increase can only be earned twice
            in a career. JROTC instructors not eligible for a PDU base increase shall
            receive $1,000 in non- base building pay for each PDU. JROTC instructors
            may complete up to two (2) PDUs per year.

     33-4-5 During SY 2022-2023, the Implementation Team or its sub-committee will



                                       109 of 137
              review the PDU guidelines to identify guidelines that better align with the
              requirements and developments of JROTC instruction qualifications. The
              Implementation Team will approve these guidelines by consensus. If
              consensus is not reached, the matter shall go to the JROTC Program
              Supervisor for decision.

      33-4-5 JROTC instructors that facilitate PDUs will be paid a flat $1500 stipend per
              PDU.

      33-4-6 JROTC instructors will receive a benefit allowance and other benefits at the
              same level as all other DCTA covered employees receive.

33-5 Work Year. JROTC Instructors may be hired for a minimum contract period
     of 10 and up to 12 months. The work year for JROTC Instructors includes the
     regular school calendar year plus additional days as designated by the DAI
     (Director of Army Instruction).

      33-5-1 Effective SY 2022-2023, JROTC Instructors on a 10-month contract as
             of August 1, 2022 will transition to a 11-month contract.

      33-5-2 In the event the Department of Army notifies the District of necessary
             reductions to funding levels available to support the JROTC Program, the
             District may change the JROTC Instructors upcoming work year provided
             written notice is given ninety (90) days prior to the end of the current work
             year. In these situations, the JROTC Instructor’s total compensation will be
             changed commensurate with the new work year. The revised contract year
             will begin following the completion of the JRTOC Instructor’s current
             contract year.

33-6 Instructor Evaluations. At a minimum, JROTC Instructors are required to be
     evaluated on an annual basis. Instructors nationwide have an appraisal form that
     incorporates school district officials and military officials. Annual evaluations for
     JROTC Instructors will be completed using the DPS JROTC Instructor Annual
     Performance Appraisal Form (DPS-214-R). For purposes of this Article, the
     term(s) “rater,” “intermediate rater,” or “senior rater” means evaluator. The
     appraisal form used for instructors providers for an evaluation of all their aspects,
     school district and military.

      33-6-1 Army Instructors (AI) shall be rated by their Senior Army Instructors
             (SAI), intermediate rated by the principal (or designee), and Senior rated



                                        110 of 137
              by the DAI.

      33-6-2 Senior Army Instructors shall be rated by the DAI, intermediate rated
             by the principal (or designee), and senior rated by the current DPS JROTC
             Supervisor.

      33-6-3 A successful evaluation, for District purposes only and for purposes
             of compensation increases described above, shall be defined as an overall
             score of Approaching or above.

      33-6-4 The senior rater may not change the comments or scores of the rater
             or intermediate rater. The senior rater’s overall score will be supported by
             the quantitative and/or qualitative information.

33-7 Misconduct/Performance

      33-7-1 Cases of instructor misconduct or poor performance may be
             addressed through Army regulations or DPS policies - depending on the
             circumstances. In these cases, the DAI will determine which course of
             action will best address the issue. Matters subject to Army regulations and
             policies will be addressed in accordance with AR 145-2, CCR 145-2 or
             other applicable regulatory guidelines. Matters not subject to Army
             regulations and policies will be addressed in accordance with Board
             policies, the collective bargaining agreement, and other applicable district
             procedures.

      33-7-2 The term “grievance” under Article 7 shall not apply to alleged
             violations, misinterpretation, or inequitable application of applicable Army
             Regulations or to any matter as to which the method of review is
             prescribed by Army Regulation.

33-8 Decertification/Dismissal

      33-8-1 If the US Army decertifies the instructor or withdraws approval for the
             instructor, the instructor’s employment with the District shall be
             immediately and automatically terminated. Decertification of a JROTC
             Instructor, for any reason, by the U.S. The Department of Defense is not
             subject to Article 7 or other dismissal rights under this agreement. Refer to
             AR 145-2.




                                       111 of 137
      33-8-2 A JROTC Instructor recommended for dismissal for violations of
             District policies as they relate to instructor conduct, behavior, and
             performance is entitled to a hearing consistent with the procedures
             provided in Administrative Policy GDQD and GDQD-R.

                            Article 34 - Associate Teachers

34-1 Associate Teachers shall be teachers in their first year of employment
     with the District who perform teaching responsibilities for at least 50% of
     the workday and participate in teacher development activities, as
     assigned by the Associate Teacher’s supervisor the remaining time.

34-2 Associate Teachers shall be placed on the Associate Teacher salary
     schedule according to the lane associated with their degree level.

34-3 The District will apply an annual cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) to the
     Associate Teachers salary schedule that is commensurate with the
     COLA increase contemplated in Article 37.

34-4 Associate Teachers will receive the full negotiated benefit allowance in
     accordance with Article 26-1.

34-5 Associate Teachers will receive all applicable incentives outlined in
     the Parties’ collective bargaining agreements.

34-6 Associate Teachers will complete the induction process and all
     applicable professional development required by first year teachers.

34-7 Associate Teachers shall receive a LEAP evaluation, which shall count as one year
     toward non probationary status if the Associate Teacher receives a score of
     “effective” or better.

34-8 Associate Teachers will be subject to contract non-renewal unless they obtain a
     mutual consent teaching position for the school year following their Associate
     Teaching year.

34-9 Associate Teachers who obtain a mutual-consent teaching position for the
     school year following their Associate Teaching year will be placed on the
     applicable step and lane on the salary schedule based on years of experience
     and education as outlined in the Parties’ collective bargaining agreement.

34-10 The Parties agree that there will be a cap of twenty-five Associate


                                        112 of 137
      Teachers each school year throughout the district.

                 Article 35 - Educational Sign Language Interpreters

35-1 Except as expressly set forth in this article, the terms and conditions of the
     Collective Bargaining Agreement shall apply to Educational Sign Language
     Interpreters (ESLI).

35-2 Work Year. The contract year shall be 186 days. If an ESLI is required to extend
     their contract year and is continuing to do the work they performed during the
     contract year, they will be paid at their regular scheduled rate per day. Regular
     scheduled rate per day is the ESLI’s salary divided by the number of days in the
     contract year.

35-3 Non-ESLI Duties.

      35-3-1 In each classroom, the teacher is responsible for
              establishing and enforcing behavioral procedures. The teacher will provide
              ESLIs with the ability to maintain neutral, professional boundaries by not
              requiring direct correction of students’ behavior or provide physical support
              with toileting or diapering.

      35-3-2 An ESLI’s non-interpreting duty time will be used consistent with ESLI
              Handbook and for implementing the Individuals with Disabilities Education
              Act (IDEA) and/or Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act.

35-4 Planning Time: ESLI’s shall receive a minimum of three hundred (300)
     uninterrupted, self-directed planning time per week. The ESLIs will work with their
     immediate supervisor to make arrangements which allow for the ESLI to take the
     full amount of self-directed planning time each week.

      35-4-1 ESLIs who are directed to cover for another ESLI during self-directed
             planning time will be paid on a prorated basis at their normal hourly rate.

      35-4-2 ESLIs that work in multiple buildings will not be expected to use their
             self-directed plan time or duty free lunch to drive to another DPS worksite.
             Drive time will be built into the schedule.

35-5 Educational Interpreter Leadership Team:




                                        113 of 137
     35-5-1 ESLIs shall have an Educational Interpreter Leadership Team (EILT), which
            shall make decisions using the process outlined in Article 5-5-2, with the
            exception that if consensus cannot be reached, the matter shall be
            referred to the Senior Manager of Special Services who shall consult with
            the Association prior to making a decision. The EILT will consist of the Low
            Incidence Disability Department Manager, at least one ESLI Team Lead,
            and at least two other ESLIs elected annually by a majority of the ESLIs
            voting by secret ballot.

     35-5-2 The EILT will review and collaborate on the design of
             procedures, processes, and schedules affecting the ESLIs, including:

                      1. Summer School/Evening School duties;
                      2. Teaming protocols;
                      3. Factors impacting workload calculations
                      4. Substitute requests;
                      3. The professional development plan within the contract year;
                         e.g. use of “teal days” or equivalent;
                      4. Processes for hiring, assignment, transfer, and workload
                         expectations, including basic job postings and detailed job
                         descriptions
                      5. ESLI Handbook
                      6. Reduction in Force protocol/criteria and interview panel
                      7. Team lead professional development/mentoring
                      8. Other department-level protocols and procedures, including
                         recommendations on resources and materials.

     35-5-3 The EILT will develop goals and other discussion topics yearly.

     35-5-4 Decisions made by the EILT will be communicated to and approved by
            the Low Incidence Disability Department Leadership Team

35-7 Personnel Committee:

     35-7-1 ESLIs shall be hired by a personnel committee comprised of at least two
            ESLIs selected by a majority vote of the ESLI faculty, one ESLI Team Lead
            selected by a majority vote of the ESLI faculty, and the Low Incidence
            Disability Manager or their designee.




                                      114 of 137
      35-7-2 The Personnel Committee shall operate all year, with the exception that
             outside of the work year the Low Incidence Disability Manager shall make a
             good faith effort to assemble as many of the Personnel Committee
             members or alternates as may be available.

      35-7-3 The Personnel Committee will make decisions by consensus, if possible. If
             the Personnel Committee is unable to reach a decision by consensus, the
             Low Incidence Disability Manager or their designee will make a decision.

      35-7-4 The decisions or results of the Personnel Committee shall not be grievable.
              The failure to comply with the procedure contained in this article is subject
              to grievance.

35-8 Reductions

     35-8-1 The interview panel will attempt to reach consensus on the candidate most
            suitable to be reduced. If the interview panel is unable to reach consensus,
            the department manager will decide which candidate(s) will be reduced.

     35-8-2 The decisions or results of the interview panel shall not be grievable. The
            failure to comply with the procedure contained in this article is subject to
            grievance.

35-9 Facilities

     35-9-1 In addition to the provisions identified within Articles 15 and 16, and to the
            extent practicable, a school shall provide: (1) a workspace for ESLIs to
            collaborate as a building-level team, discuss confidential student information
            and to perform other work duties while not interpreting; (2) a space which
            may be locked to keep personal items provided that the District shall not be
            held to be the insurer of the ESLI’s personal belongings stored in such
            space. Upon request, the school will provide a dedicated chair or stool for
            the ESLI in the classroom.

35-10 Contracts and Dismissal Procedures.

     35-10-1 ESLIs will be deemed to be on annual contracts and any termination
             during those annual contracts shall only be for just cause.




                                        115 of 137
     35-10-2 After an ESLI has completed three years of satisfactory or effective
             performance, the ESLI shall be entitled to a hearing with an impartial
             hearing officer if they are recommended for dismissal, consistent with the
             procedures provided in Board Policy GDQD and GDQD-R.

35-11 ESLI Evaluation

     35-11-1 Consistent with Article 29-4, ESLIs will be evaluated annually under the
             SSP Growth and Performance System “SSP GPS.”

                 Article 36 - Career and Technical ProTech Instructors

Except as expressly set forth in this article, the terms and conditions of the Collective
Bargaining Agreement shall apply to Career and Technical ProTech Instructors.

36-1 Evaluation: CTE Protech Instructors and Lead ProTech Instructors may serve on
     the LEAP Collaboration Committee in order to suggest and make changes to the
     LEAP system to better represent the duties of CTE ProTech Instructors following
     the process outlined in Article 10 of the Agreement.
36-2 Reductions: The procedures in Article 13 would apply, with the exception of Article
     13 10-7 (requirement to provide notice of need to get mutual consent after
     reduction). The notice procedures shall be the same for CTE ProTech Instructors
     as they are for SSPs (article 29-2-2). CTE ProTech Instructors who are reduced
     will be notified that they should apply for new positions in the District. If a CTE
     ProTech Instructor is not hired into a new position prior to the conclusion of the
     current position, the CTE ProTech Instructor will not be continued into the
     subsequent school year, but will be immediately eligible for rehire.
36-3 Dismissal. CTE Instructors will be on annual contracts and any termination during
     those annual contracts shall only be for just cause.
          a. The procedures in Administrative Policy GDQD and its regulation GDQD-R
             shall apply to CTE ProTech Instructors.
          b. After a CTE ProTech Instructor or Lead ProTech Instructor has completed
             three years of satisfactory or effective performance, the Instructor shall be
             entitled to a hearing with an impartial hearing officer if they are
             recommended for dismissal, consistent with the procedures provided in
             Administrative Policy GDQD and GDQD-R.




                                         116 of 137
           Article 37 - Professional Compensation System for Educators
                             (Beginning August 1, 2022)

37-1 Salary Setting. Base salary will be based on years of service (“steps”) as well as
      education level, longevity, and advanced license/national board (“lanes”),
      consistent with the following Salary Schedule, which shall increase consistent
      with the parties’ Financial Agreement:




       37-1-1 For new employees, a maximum of ten years of experience will be
               credited.
               New employees hired after August 1, 2019 to present into assignments
               identified as hard-to-fill by the Implementation Team will be credited a
               maximum of twelve (12) years of experience.

                If new employees hired into assignments identified as hard-to-fill by the
                Implementation Team were granted up to ten (10) years of experience
                at hire between 2019 and 2022, they may be eligible for an additional
                two (2) years of credit. It is the employee’s responsibility to initiate a
                request with supporting documentation with the Office of Talent (Human
                Resources) by the end of school year 2022-2023 for eligibility for
                additional credit due to the change of cap experience for hard-to-fill
                positions. Retroactive payments for additional credits will not be
                provided additional service.



                                       117 of 137
       37-1-2 SSPs that require a Masters of less than fifty-four (54) credits will be
               placed in the MA lane. An SSP whose position requires a Masters of
               fifty-four (54) or more credits will be placed in the MA+18 lane.

       37-1-3   Beginning August 1, 2022, the District will use the ProComp Trust Fund
                balance to cover the transition costs for CTE ProTech Instructors and
                ESLI educators will move to their new respective Salary Schedule. The
                funds for transition costs will ensure:

                37-1-3-1 Current CTE ProTech Instructors will be placed
                         on the DCTA CTE ProTech Instructor Salary Schedule which
                         will reflect the DCTA Salary Schedule according to their
                         current years of service, longevity, and the lane for which they
                         are eligible.

                          37-1-3-1-1    All CTE ProTech Instructors without
                                        a Bachelors degree, and that meet the Colorado
                                        Department of Education CTE Authorization
                                        instructor criteria will be placed on the BA/CDE
                                        Authorization lane on the salary schedule.

                37-1-3-2 ESLI educators shall be placed on the DCTA ESLI Salary
                         Schedule which will reflect the BA and BA+18 columns of the
                         DCTA Salary Schedule. The ESLI Salary Schedule will have
                         two lanes: BA and BA+36/Masters. ESLI educators will be
                         placed on the new salary schedule consistent with their exact
                         step on the former salary schedule.

                          37-1-3-2-1    ESLI educators hired on or after August 01,
                                        2022 with five (5) or less years of experience
                                        will be placed on Step 1 of the new salary
                                        schedule. ESLI educators with six (6) to ten (10)
                                        years of experience will be placed on Step 2 of
                                        the new salary schedule.

37-2 Vertical Movement down the Salary Schedule.

      37-2-1 Professional Evaluation Step. Effective August 1 of each year, an
              Educator is eligible to advance one step, consistent with the Salary
              Schedule, if they receive an approaching or better rating on their
              end-of-year evaluation rating in the previous year.

37-3 Horizontal Movement across the Salary Schedule.




                                       118 of 137
37-3-1 Longevity. Ten years of service in the DCTA bargaining unit (i.e.
        classified as an Educator, TOSA, Peer Observer, JROTC, CTE, and
        ESLI) within the last fifteen years (“Longevity”) equals one lane change
        with a cap at Lane MA+54. If an Educator is in MA+54 or the Doctorate
        lane and not able to use the Longevity lane change, the Educator will
        receive a base increase of $2,000. Longevity can only be used for lane
        movement or the $2,000 base increase once in a career. It is calculated
        as one lane movement to the right of the lane that corresponds to the
        educator’s education/credit accrual.

             Example: An Educator comes to DPS and is placed in the
             BA+36/MA lane because they have a Masters; they then get their
             National Board certification and move to the MA+18 lane (one lane
             to the right of her education/credit accrual level); then they earn
             Longevity and move to the MA+36 lane; then they earn 18 credits
             (PDU and/or post-college), they move to the MA+54 lane because
             their education level is MA+18 and they have two qualifying lane
             changes through the National Board and Longevity.

37-3-2 Advanced License/National Board. Obtaining an Advanced License or
        National Board Certification equals one lane change with a cap at Lane
        MA+54. If an Educator is in the MA+54 or Doctorate lanes, they will
        receive a base increase of $2,000. A lane change based on an
        Advanced License/National Board or the $2,000 base increase can only
        be earned once in a career. It is calculated as one lane movement to the
        right of the lane that corresponds to the educator’s education/credit
        accrual. See example above in 30-3-1.

37-3-3 Professional Development Units, Equity Experience Credit, ELA
        Credit, and University Credits.

         37-3-3-1 Credits for salary advancement may be obtained from:
             ● University credits, which must come from a regionally accredited
                university or college program earned post-BA in a birth through
                twenty-one (21) content or focus area. University credits must
                have been completed after the Educator’s most recent and
                highest degree was conferred.
             ● Professional Development Units (“PDUs”).
             ● District-sponsored PDUs provided by external providers.
             ● Continuing Education Units (“CEUs”) approved by District in
                accordance with professional affiliations/associations for PDU
                credits. The Implementation Team will approve the guidelines
                for CEU-based PDU credits.
             ● Participants in required DPS ELA courses will earn DPS credit
                and/or graduate credit that can be used for lane movement.
                DPS credit (15 contact hours is the equivalent of 1 credit) is


                                119 of 137
           available for all ELA required classes; university credit (paid for
           by DPS) is available for certain courses. Participants cannot
           earn both DPS credit and university credit for the same class.
           Educators can begin acquiring DPS credit starting in the spring
           semester of the 2018-19 school year for ELA classes
           completed.
         ● Educators who complete required Modules 1 through 9 of the
           Equity Experience will earn the equivalent of two (2) credits
           towards lane movement.
         ● Salary advancement may consist of a combination of post-BA
           university credits as well as DPS credits. College or university
           credit must be from a DPS approved institution of higher
           learning and applicable to the employee’s current or future
           teaching/role or related educational field.

37-3-3-2 Movement earned through credit (university or PDU) past the
          BA+36/MA lane requires a Masters. Movement into the Doctorate
          lane requires a Doctorate.

37-3-3-3 Professional Development Units.

      37-3-3-3-1 A PDU is differentiated, action research learning with
                   application to practice designed to support teachers and
                   SSPs to improve or acquire skills focused on topics of
                   student need, including closing the opportunity gap.

      37-3-3-3-2   PDUs have three components – Study, Demonstration,
                   and Reflection, with a course of study of at least 30 hours
                   for two credits or 45 hours for three credits. The
                   approved PDU proposal will document how the time will
                   be allocated based on the PDU guidelines.

      37-3-3-3-3   As documented in the approved PDU proposal, the 30 or
                   45 hours will include:

                          ● Time in instruction and/or participation in a
                            learning cohort outside the school day
                          ● Time to read and study; and
                          ● Time to reflect and apply learnings.

      37-3-3-3-4   The author of the PDU proposal will determine and map
                   out the allocation of the 30 or 45 hours.

      37-3-3-3-5   Participants will not need to submit additional


                            120 of 137
              documentation of their hours of work; the approved PDU
              completion will be adequate to apply for the lane change.

37-3-3-3-6    As with a college course, participants will earn the three
              credits upon facilitator acknowledgment of completion.

37-3-3-3-7    Some courses of study might be offered for a PDU or
              university credit. In these cases, participants need to
              choose either the PDU or the university credit, not both.

37-3-3-3-8    Educators can complete up to six PDU credits per year.

37-3-3-3-9 All applications for PDUs must be submitted according to
             established guidelines. The Implementation Team will
             approve the guidelines by consensus.

37-3-3-3-10 PDUs will be approved and managed by designated
             district leader on professional development.

37-3-3-3-11 Employees who are not eligible to move a lane receive a
             $1000 payment for every three (3) credit or $667 for
             every two (2) credit PDU earned (BA+36 without a
             Masters, MA+54, and Doctorate). Only employees who
             are not eligible to move a lane as of September 01,
             2022 will be eligible to receive a $667 payment for
             completing the equivalent two (2) credit Equity
             Experience course. (BA+36 without a Masters, MA+54,
             and Doctorate) Employees that work less than full time
             will receive the full payment of a completed PDU.

37-3-3-3-12 Educators that design and facilitate a 3 credit PDU will be
             paid a flat $2,000 stipend per PDU or can receive a
             reduced stipend of $1,500 with a PDU credit option.
             Educators that facilitate a previously designed 3 credit
             PDU, or a PDU designed by another, will be paid a
             $1,500 stipend or can receive a reduced stipend of
             $1,000 with a PDU credit option.

37-3-3-3-13   Educators that design and facilitate a 2 credit PDU will
              be paid a $1500 stipend per PDU or can receive a
              reduced stipend of $1000 with a PDU credit option.
              Educators that facilitate a previously designed 2 credit
              PDU, or a PDU designed by another, will be paid a
              $1000 stipend or can receive a reduced stipend of $750


                       121 of 137
                               with a PDU credit option.

                37-3-3-3-14    Educators that Lead or Design a PDU session can take
                               a 1 credit PDU Design and Leadership Course (15hrs)

                37-3-3-3-15 Required professional development will follow this
                             Agreement and is not eligible for PDUs, with the
                             exception of district required ELA courses discussed
                             above.

  37-3-4 It is the employee’s responsibility to initiate a request for horizontal increases
           in salary due to additional hours of training credit. Credit submitted and
           resulting in horizontal movement will be effective no later than 30 days
           following submission and approval of the official transcript.

37-4 Incentives:

  37-4-1 Distinguished Schools

            37-4-1-1 Each year, the bargaining unit members in up to ten (10) schools
                      may receive the Distinguished Schools Incentive for their work
                      around the whole child. Those schools shall be awarded this
                      $750 non-base building incentive based upon a process
                      created by the Implementation Team. The ten (10) schools
                      must include a variety of student populations and regions from
                      ECE-High school including Pathways schools. Schools are
                      only able to receive the bonus once every three (3) years. The
                      criteria will be defined by the Implementation Team no later
                      than April 30 of each year for the next year’s incentive.

                          a. The Implementation Team shall use a process that
                          considers the following when awarding the Distinguished
                          Schools Incentive:
                                 1. Health Education
                                 2. Physical Education and Physical Activity
                                 3. Nutrition Environment and Services
                                 4. Health Services
                                 5. Counseling, Psychology, and Social Support
                                    Services
                                 6. Social and Emotional School Climate
                                 7. Physical Environment
                                 8. Employee Wellness
                                 9. Family Engagement
                                 10. Community Involvement


                                       122 of 137
                               11. Support for students in historically marginalized
                                  groups
                               12. Implementation of the Black Excellence
                                   Resolution
                               13. Implementation of the Know Justice Know
                                   Peace Resolution
                               14. Recruitment and Retention of BIPOC
                                     Educators

                        b. The Implementation Team shall not use any of the
                        following when deciding which schools will receive the
                        distinguished schools incentive:

                               1. The School Performance Framework
                               2. LEAP Ratings
                               3. The Student Perception Surveys used as part of
                               the LEAP Process

                        c. The incentive shall be awarded in a lump sum no later
                        than May 31 of each year.

37-4-2 Hard-to-Fill Positions Incentive: Educators working in assignments
         identified by the Implementation Team as hard-to-fill shall receive a
         non-base incentive of $2,000/year.

          37-4-2-1 The Office of Talent (Human Resources) shall create and the
                    Implementation Team will approve a set of data that includes
                    data on educator supply and educator turnover for identifying
                    hard-to-fill assignments.

          37-4-2-2 The total number of assignments identified as hard-to-fill shall
                    equal between twenty percent (20%) and thirty five percent
                    (35%) of the total bargaining unit measured by the full-time
                    equivalent.

37-4-3 Hard to Staff Schools Incentives:

          37-4-3-1 Title I Incentive: All Educators who work in a Title I school will
                   receive $2,000/year in a non-base building incentive.

          37-4-3-2 Highest Priority Schools Retention Incentive: Effective
                    school year 2022-2023, the Highest Priority Schools Retention
                    Incentive will be eliminated. Returning bargaining members in
                    the thirty (30) schools previously eligible for this incentive will


                                    123 of 137
                       receive a $1,000 retention bonus, paid as a lump sum in the fall
                       of 2022 from the ProComp Trust Fund balance.

                       DPS and DCTA agree that $3.5 million allocated to the Highest
                       Priority School Incentive will be reallocated as follows:
                              ● $715,000 will be reallocated to cover the total cost to
                                 increase the number of assignments identified as
                                 hard-to-fill from 30% to 35% (Art. 37-4-2-2-).
                              ● $2,785,000 will be reallocated to the creation of the
                                 Special Education and SSP pool (Art. 8-7-4).

  37-4-4 Tuition Reimbursement: Educators may receive reimbursement for up to a
          career maximum of $6,000 spent on repayment of student loans or
          reimbursement for the direct costs of their professional development
          related to assignment(s) for which they are or could become qualified.
          Educators shall be eligible for up to $1,000 in any school year. The Payroll
          Department will maintain guidelines for tuition reimbursement. The
          Implementation Team will review and approve any substantive changes to
          these guidelines. The Implementation Team has the authority to increase
          the career maximum amount if the budget of the Trust supports the
          expansion.

37-5 Governance, Oversight, and Evaluation of the Professional Compensation
      System for Teachers.

     37-5-1 The District and Association shall maintain a trust fund (hereafter referred
              to as “the Trust”) created by the passage of a mill levy override election
              and such other monies as may be earmarked, including interest
              earned on the principal for the purpose of funding the Professional
              Compensation System for Educators. This Trust shall ensure the
              financial stability over time of the funds of the Trust and the enactment
              of the ballot language approved by the voters in the mill levy override
              election. The funds of the Trust shall be spent only on the Professional
              Compensation System for Educators and only in keeping with the
              terms and conditions of this Agreement, the Trust Agreement, and the
              ballot language approved by the voters in the mill levy override
              election. The ballot language is included as Appendix A of this
              Agreement.

        37-5-1-1 The Trust Shall Be Governed by a Board of Directors. The Board of
                  Directors of the Trust (hereafter referred to as the Trust Board)
                  shall have the fiduciary responsibility to ensure the financial
                  stability over time of the funds of the Trust and the enactment of
                  the ballot language approved by the voters in the mill levy override


                                      124 of 137
           election. The Trust Board also has the fiduciary responsibility to
           ensure that funds of the Trust shall be spent only on the
           Professional Compensation System for Educators and only in
           keeping with the terms and conditions of this Agreement and the
           ballot language approved by the voters in the mill levy override
           election of the Professional Compensation System for Educators.
           Should the Trust Board at any time determine that the funds have
           not been spent on the Professional Compensation System for
           Educators, or according to the terms and conditions of this
           Agreement or in a manner in keeping with the ballot language
           approved by the voters in the mill levy override election, then the
           Board has the duty to stop transmitting the funds of the Trust to the
           District.

37-5-1-2 Composition. The Trust Board shall be composed of three
         representatives appointed by the Association President, three
         representatives of the District, and two representatives of the
         community appointed by the agreement of the other six members of
         the Trust Board. The District’s representatives to the Trust Board
         shall be three members of the administration appointed by the
         Superintendent. The community members appointed to the Trust
         Board shall have substantial professional qualification in financial
         matters. Members shall serve three-year terms. Terms shall
         overlap so that the terms of one Association representative and one
         District representative expire each year.

37-5-1-3 Decision Making. The Trust Board shall make decisions only
          when a majority of five or more members agree.

37-5-1-4 Duties. The Trust Board is assigned the following specific duties in
          fulfillment of their charge:

          a. Being well informed and trained about their fiduciary
          responsibilities as directors.

          b. Direct the Implementation Team to provide, no later than April
          30th of each year, a report on the ProComp proposed
          assumptions/budget.

          c. Authorize transfer of funds to the district in accordance with the
          approved annual ProComp budget and approved adjustments.

          d. Annually commission an external audit of the revenues and
          expenditure of trust funds by the District on the Professional
          Compensation System for Teachers and submit the final audit to


                             125 of 137
         the District and Association.

         e. Spend no more than 5% of the Trust’s annual mill levy receipts
         per year on the cost of administering ProComp. The
         Implementation Team will approve these expenditures annually.

37-5-2 The Implementation Team

     37-5-2-1 The District and Association recognize that it is the
               responsibility and duty of the District to administer all
               aspects of the compensation system. The purpose of the
               Implementation Team is to ensure that the administration of
               the compensation system is conducted according to this
               Agreement and to ensure that the Association is involved in
               and informed about the development, implementation and
               evaluation of the compensation terms in this Agreement.

     37-5-2-2   Composition. The composition of The Implementation Team
                shall have an equal District and DCTA representation
                including at least one representative from the student services
                professions based on need.
     37-5-2-3 Release time for members of the Implementation Team will be
               provided based on needs determined by the Implementation
               Team and available funding.


    37-5-2-4 When making decisions, the Implementation Team shall make
              decisions by consensus.


     37-5-2-5 The Implementation Team shall replace the former ProComp
               Transition Team and will remain in effect through the term of
               the Agreement. Members of the ProComp Transition Team
               shall comprise the Implementation Team without need for
               reappointment.




                            126 of 137
                        2022-2025 FINANCIAL AGREEMENT


2022-2023 Financial Agreement
  1. Effective August 1, 2022, the District will apply a 6% cost-of-living adjustment
     (COLA) to the Teacher/SSP Salary Schedule.
  2. Effective August 1, 2022, the eligible educators will receive a step increase and
     educators will be eligible to receive a lane increase.


2023-2024 and 2024-2025 Financial Agreement
  1. The Cost of Living Adjustment (COLA) increase applied to the teacher/ssp salary
     schedule will be equal to the Denver-Aurora-Lakewood Consumer Price Index
     (CPI) used in the calculation of the School Finance Act less the cost of the
     calculated percentage of the step and lane increase so long as the per student
     increase in state funding to Denver Public Schools is at least equal to the
     Denver-Aurora-Lakewood Consumer Price Index (CPI): (COLA=CPI MINUS
     STEPS).
  2. Should the absolute value of the Budget Stabilization Factor be decreased by an
     amount that produces revenue to Denver Public Schools for the support of DPS
     managed students in excess of the calculated costs of Steps and Lanes, then
     compensation adjustment for teachers will be steps, lanes, and COLA equal to the
     full CPI adjustment to the School Finance funding formula. Should the Budget
     Stabilization Factor in for the school year 2023-24 decrease by enough to cover
     the full cost of steps lanes and full COLA in both 2023-24 and 2024-25, and that
     level of Budget Stabilization is maintained in 2024-25, the full COLA will be
     applied to the salary schedule in 2024-25. Should the state reduce funding to
     DPS and other school districts through an increase in the absolute value of the
     Budget Stabilization Factor or by other methods, the district may reopen the
     financial agreement effective August 1, for the subsequent school years 2023-24
     and 2024-25, eligible employees will receive a step increase for the school year,
     and employees will be eligible to receive a lane increase (estimated to be 2.7%
     but will be calculated based on actual expense).
  3. During each year, if the full COLA is not credited after the BS Factor buy down,
     returning teachers will receive a one-time payment of $1,000.
  4. Educators whose base salary is higher than the maximum step of their respective
     lane will be eligible to receive the difference between any base pay increase and
     the COLA as a one-time,non-based building stipend until the salary schedule
     catches up with them.



                                       127 of 137
DCTA CTE ProTech Instructor Salary Schedule




                128 of 137
DCTA ESLI Salary Schedule




        129 of 137
Appendix A – Ballot Language for the ProComp Mill Levy Override Approved by
Denver Voters November 1, 2005.


                            REFERRED ISSUE 3A

“SHALL DENVER PUBLIC SCHOOLS (SCHOOL DISTRICT NO. 1) TAXES BE
  INCREASED $25 MILLION PER YEAR, ADJUSTED FOR INFLATION, SOLELY AND
  EXCLUSIVELY TO FUND THE PROFESSIONAL COMPENSATION SYSTEM FOR
  TEACHERS (PROCOMP), WHICH TAX INCREASE SHALL TERMINATE IF
  PROCOMP TERMINATES, INCLUDING COMPENSATION TO TEACHERS FOR


  ▪   TEACHING IN HARD-TO-STAFF SCHOOLS

  ▪   TEACHING IN HARD-TO-FILL POSITIONS SUCH AS MATH, SCIENCE AND
      SPECIAL EDUCATION

  ▪   INCREASING TEACHING KNOWLEDGE AND TEACHING SKILLS BY
      SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETING PROCOMP APPROVED ADVANCED
      DEGREES, PROFESSIONAL TEACHING STANDARDS LICENSES AND
      ADDITIONAL TRAINING TO IMPROVE CLASSROOM SKILLS

  ▪   POSITIVE EVALUATIONS OF TEACHING PERFORMANCE

  ▪   MEETING OR EXCEEDING OBJECTIVES FOR STUDENT LEARNING

  ▪   ACHIEVING DISTINGUISHED SCHOOL STATUS

  BY AN ADDITIONAL PROPERTY TAX LEVY THAT RESULTS IN THE DOLLAR
  AMOUNT OF REVENUES SET FORTH ABOVE IN THE CURRENT BUDGET YEAR
  AND THE SAME DOLLAR AMOUNT, ADJUSTED ANNUALLY IN EACH BUDGET
  YEAR THEREAFTER FOR INFLATION AS MEASURED BY THE
  DENVER-BOULDER-GREELEY CONSUMER PRICE INDEX, WHICH REVENUES
  SHALL BE USED SOLELY AND EXCLUSIVELY FOR, AND NONE OF WHICH WILL
  BE SPENT FOR ANY PURPOSE OTHER THAN, FUNDING PROCOMP?”




                                  130 of 137
Executed this ____________________ day of ______________, 2022.


DENVER CLASSROOM TEACHERS                SCHOOL DISTRICT NO. 1 IN THE
ASSOCIATION                              CITY AND COUNTY OF DENVER



By _______________________________       By______________________________
   Rob Gould, DCTA President                  Xochitl Gaytan, President DPS
                                              Board of Education


ATTEST:                                  ATTEST:



By ____________________________          By _____________________________




                                  131 of 137
                                  Index by Article number
Academic freedom 24-4
Administrative leave 11-2
Administrative transfer, see transfer, administrative leave
Advisory District Personnel Performance Evaluation Council (1338 Committee) 10-5
Agreement given to teachers and administrators 2-3, 21-3-5
Agreement Review Committee (ARC) 5-6, 7-5-6, 11-2-8,
Anti-discrimination 2-2, 2-9, 13-4,
Appraisal, see teacher evaluation
Assaults, teacher accused of 17-2, see also administrative leave 11-2
Assaults upon teachers 17-1
Assessment day 8-1-2, 8-1-2-3
Association, recognition as sole bargaining agent 3-2, 21-1
Association rights 3-3, 21
Association rights, Association leave 21-5
Association rights, Association President 21-1-1, 21-1-2
Association rights, Association Representatives 21-1-6
Association rights, dues deduction and revocation, 21-2, 21-3, 21-4
Association rights, representation of teacher 7-3-1, 7-4, 11-2-3, 11-2-6, 11-3-1,
Association rights, school mail, mailboxes and bulletin boards, 21-1-4, 21-1-5
Athletic Board of Control, representation on 28-4
Audiologists 1-12, 3-1, 13-12
Beacon Schools 1-11
Benefits Board 26-2
Board (District) policy 2-6, 18-4, 18-4-1, 12-1-4a, 28-3, 29-1-3, Appendix B
Building instructional coaches 28-3-1 Schedule 11
Central office files 7-5-2, 9
Central office files, access to 9
Collaborative School Committee (CSC) 8-6, 13-10-1, 13-8-2, 13-9-2, 22-1-5, 23-2
Class coverage 8-10, 28-6
Classroom interruptions 8-9
Class size, elementary 8-5-2
Class size, secondary 8-5-1-1, 8-5-1-2
Communication by teachers 23-2
Compensation, activity salaries 28-3
Compensation, Assistance Program 28-2
Compensation, Building Instructional Coaches 28-3-1 Schedule 11
Compensation, cost of living adjustment (COLA) Financial Agreement
Compensation, education increments Article 30
Compensation, Professional Evaluation steps Article 30
Compensation, extra-curricular activities 28-3
Compensation, extra duty 28
Compensation, in-service education 27-1
Compensation, job sharing and part-time assignments 22-1-4
Compensation, Longevity lane change Article 30



                                     132 of 137
Compensation, mentor assignments 28-2
Compensation, National Board Certification, incentives Article 30, 27-2
Compensation, newly hired teachers 27-1, 30-1
Compensation, paid class coverage 8-10, 28-6
Compensation, retirement, early notification of 27-6
Compensation, salary schedule Article 30
Compensation, salary schedule, placement and advancement Article 30
Compensation, secondary after-school supervision 28-2
Compensation, sports/activities 28-3-1
Compensation, summer school 14-1-2, 28-2
Compensation, supervision of events, 28-2-1
Compensation, Teacher Education Fund 27-4
Compensation, transportation allowance 27-5
Compensation, unused sick leave and retirement work group 20-1-1-5, 27-3, 27-3-5
Complaints against teachers 11-1
Conditions of employment, special 8-1-5
Continuing full and half-day substitutes 28-2
Contract year 8-1
Controversial issues in the classroom 24
Corrective action 11-3
Covered employees 3-1
Daily substitute pay 28-2
Denver School of the Arts, compensation 28-3-1 Schedule 10
Department Chairpersons 8-6, 8-10-1
Discipline, of a student 18
Discipline, of a teacher 11-3
Dues deductions 21-3
Effective dates of Agreement 4-1
Elementary teaching load 8-5-2
Emergency school closings 8-11
Employment, special conditions of 8-1-5
Evaluation of teachers, see teacher evaluation
Evening meetings 8-1-4
Evening school 14
Expectations of teachers 23
Extended leaves of absence 20
Extra duty compensation 28
Facilities, teacher 15
Files, teacher 7-5-2, 9
Forty-hour work week 8-2
Framework for Partnership, after Table of Contents
General provisions 2
Good faith enforcement of Agreement 2-1
Grade level chairpersons 5-5-1, 8-10-1
Grievance 7
Grievance, definitions 7-1



                                     133 of 137
Grievance, expedited 7-3, 7-3-4
Grievance, group 7-5-1
Grievance, information sharing 7-3, 7-3-2, 7-5-4
Grievance, Level One (informal) 7-3-1
Grievance, Level Two 7-3-3
Grievance, Level Three 7-3-5
Grievance, Level Three, arbitration 7-3-5-2
Grievance, Level Three, Board action 7-3-5-7
Grievance, Level Three, expedited arbitration 7-3-5-2-1
Grievance, Level Three, mediation 7-3-5, 7-3-5-1
Grievance, Level Three, timelines 7-3-5, 7-3-5-7, 7-3-5-8
Grievance, Personnel Committee decisions 13-8-5
Grievance, procedure 7-3
Grievance, purpose 7-2
Grievance, release from school for 7-4-3, 7-5-5
Grievance, rights of teachers to representation 7-3-1, 7-4
Grievance, time limits to file 7-3
Half-time employment 22
Induction program 27-1-2
Instructional Issues Council 5-3
Instructional materials 12
Instructional Superintendents 5-4
Insurance, benefits allowance/cafeteria plan 26-1
Insurance, Benefits Board 26-1, 26-2
Insurance, disability 26-2, 26-3
Insurance, group life/long-term disability 26-3
Insurance, health 26-1, 26-2
Insurance, IRS 125 Plan, 26-5
Insurance, liability 26-4
Insurance, life 26-3
Interest-Based Bargaining, see Framework for Partnership
Interim negotiations 6-4
IRS 125 Plan 26-5
Job sharing 22
JROTC instructors 3-1
Just cause in corrective action 11-3-3
LEAP Collaboration Committee 10-11
Leaves, see short leave, or extended leaves of absence
Legal proceedings leave 20-1-3
Lesson plans 8-8
Letter of reprimand or warning 11-3-3
Liability insurance 26-4
Life insurance 26-2, 26-3
Long-term substitute teachers, see continuing full and half-day substitutes
Lunch periods 8-2-1
Management, authority and responsibility of Board 2-7



                                       134 of 137
Meetings 8-1-1, 8-1-4, 8-2-2
Membership 2-10, 12-9, 21-3
Multi-school assignments 8-4
Multi-ethnic sensitivity 23-6
National Board Certification 27-2, 30-3-2
Negotiations, impasse resolution/mediation 6-2-11
Negotiations, interim 6-4
Negotiations, procedures 6
Negotiations, timelines 6-2, 6-3
New teachers and Probationary teachers 8-1-1
Non-teaching duties 8-4, 8-7
Orientation sessions, new teachers 8-1-1
Paraprofessional assistance, elementary 8-5-2
Parent/teacher conference days 8-1-2-2, 8-1-2-4
Parking 15-2-4
Personal health problems 19
Personal injury benefits 16
Personal leave 20-1-2
Personnel Committee 13-8, 23-2
Personnel Committee, training 13-8-4-2
Planning days 8-1-2
Planning days, time reserved for classroom work 8-1-2
Planning time, 8-3
Political activity 23-3-1
Professional behavior 23
Professional days 8-1-2
Professional development, 5-5-3, 8-1-3
Prohibition of reprisals 23-2
Property damage 16-2
Reduction in Building Staff (RIBS) 13-8
Remediation plans, see teacher evaluation
Representation of teacher by Association 7-3-1, 7-4, 11-2-3, 11-2-6
Reprisals against teachers 7-4-1, 23-2
Retirement, early notification of 27-6
Revocation of Association membership 21-3
Rights of teachers 2-10, 23-3, 24-2
Salary schedule Article 30
School Leadership Team 5-5
Short leaves of absence 20-1
Short leave, application for leave other than sick leave 20-1-4-3
Short leave, Association 21-4
Short leave, legal proceedings 20-1-3
Short leave, personal 20-1-2
Short leave, restrictions 20-1-4
Short leave, sick 20-1-1
Short leave, sick leave, compensation for unused days, 20-1-1-5, 20-1-1-7



                                      135 of 137
Short-term disability leave 20-3-1
Sick leave 20-1-1
Sick Leave Bank 20-1-1-4
Special conditions of employment, 8-1-5
Special educators’ duty time 8-7-2
Specialized services personnel/providers 13-12, 15-2-7
Staff morale 23-4
Statement of Beliefs, after Table of Contents
Student achievement 5-3-2, 5-7-2, 5-7-8
Student school contact day, extension 8-2-2
Substitute teachers, adequate numbers of 25-1
Summer school, evening school 14
Suspension without pay 11-2
Tax sheltered annuities 26-2, 26-2-4
Teacher assignments, notice of, types of 13-17
Teacher assignments, preferences 13-15-1
Teacher Education Fund 27-4
Teacher evaluation 10
Teacher evaluation, Advisory District Personnel Performance Evaluation Council 10-5
Teacher evaluation, Annual LEAP Evaluations 10-3
Teacher evaluation, Appeal 10-10
Teacher evaluation, Data Gathering Period 10-6-2
Teacher evaluation, Definitions 10-2
Teacher evaluation, End-of-Year Conference 10-3-4
Teacher evaluation, End-of-Year Report 10-3-3
Teacher evaluation, LEAP Fairness Guide 10-4
Teacher evaluation, Performance Improvement Process 10-6
Teacher evaluation, Redress 10-9
Teacher-in-Charge of building 8-12
Teacher lunch 8-2-1
Teacher organizations 2-2, 2-10, 21-1-3
Teacher accused of assault 17-2, see also administrative leave 11-2
Teacher schedules 13-4
Teacher schedules, non-teaching duties 8-4, 8-7, 8-7-2
Teacher schedules, teaching load 8-5-1, 8-5-2
Teacher schedules, when assigned to more than one site 8-4
Teaching loads, elementary 8-5-2
Teaching loads, secondary 8-5-1
Temporary disability 16-1, 26-2
Training 2-3, see also Framework for Partnership
Training, outside contract year 8-1-3
Transfer 13
Transfer, administrative 13-9
Transfer, administrative, changes in program 13-9-2
Transfer, administrative, consideration groups 13-10-3
Transfer, administrative, Reduction in Building Staff (RIBS) 13-10



                                      136 of 137
Transfer, administrative, teacher notification of 13-3
Transfer, assignments, notice of, types of 13-17
Transfer, CSC Committee, responsibilities 13-10-1
Transfer, direct assignment of teachers 13-17
Transfer, filling vacancies 13-18
Transfer, filling vacancies, selection procedure 13-8
Transfer, general principles 13-1
Transfer, in-building bidding 13-13
Transfer, opening/closing of a school 13-9-3, 13-11-2
Transfer, Personnel Committee, composition 13-8-2, 13-8-3
Transfer, Personnel Committee, responsibilities 13-8
Transfer, posting vacancies 13-14
Transfer, principal notification when applying for vacancies 13-17-1
Transfer, qualifications for 13-2
Transfer, Reduction in Building Staff (RIBS) 13-10
Transfer, Reduction in Building Staff, consideration groups 13-10-3
Transfer, 13-9-113-9-1
Transfer, school redesign 5-7, 13-9-3, 13-11
Transfer, selection procedure 13-16
Transfer, specialized services personnel 13-12
Transfer, vacancies, applying for 13-16, 13-17
Transfer, timelines 13-7
Transportation allowance 27-5-2, 27-5-4
Transportation of students 8-13
Unpaid leaves 20-2, 13-17-14
Unused sick leave 20-1-1-5, 20-1-1-6
Unused sick leave, selling 20-1-1-7
Waivers of Agreement or Board policy 2-4-1, 8-1-3-2
Whole Child Supports 29-1
Whole Child Task Force 29-1-3
Workers’ Compensation program 16-1-1
Work week, forty-hour 8-2
Work week, planning time 8-3
Work week, teacher lunch 8-2-1
Work year 8-1, 28-1




                                        137 of 137
