PROFESSIONAL AGREEMENT

             between

 THE BOARD OF EDUCATION
           OF
 GRANITE SCHOOL DISTRICT

               and

 THE GRANITE EDUCATION
ASSOCIATION INCORPORATED

       Covering the Period

July 1, 2011 through June 30, 2014

     Granite School District
     2500 South State Street
   Salt Lake City, Utah 84115




                1
                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS

Article                                  Subject                        Page
       Preamble                                                            3
   1   Definitions                                                         3
   2   General Provisions                                                  4
   3   Board of Education Rights and Responsibilities                      5
   4   Recognition                                                         5
   5   Negotiations                                                        6
   6   Grievance Procedure                                                 7
   7   Employment                                                         12
   8   Teacher Facilities                                                 17
   9   Teaching Hours and Teaching Load                                   17
  10   Class-Free Planning & Preparation Time for Elementary Teachers     19
  11   Teaching Assignments                                               21
  12   Disruptive Student Behavior                                        21
  13   Protection of Teachers from Assaults                               22
  14   Teacher Evaluation                                                 22
  15   Teacher Files                                                      23
  16   Posting of Vacancies, Transfers, and Promotions                    24
  17   Adult and Community School Employment                              28
  18   Leaves of Absence                                                  29
  19   Suspension, Termination and Non-Renewal of Contract                35
  20   Insurance Programs                                                 39
  21   Worker’s Compensation                                              40
  22   Dues Deduction                                                     40
  23   District Retirement Benefit                                        40
  24   School Building Professional Committee                             41
  25   Professional Planning Committee                                    42
  26   District Curriculum Committee                                      42
  27   Class Size Review Committee                                        43
  28   Released Time for GEA President                                    43
  29   Listing of Teachers                                                44
  30   Bulletin Board Space                                               44
  31   Duration and Effect of Agreement                                   44
Appendices                                                                45
  A    Salary Schedule                                                    46
  B    Grievance Form                                                     47
  C    Application for Lane Advancement                                   49
  D    Special Employment Contract                                        50
  E    Educator Evaluation Statute                                        51
  F    Teacher Application for Personal Leave                             55
  G    Orderly Termination Act                                            56
Index                                                                     61



                                            2
                                       PREAMBLE

The Board of Education of Granite School District (hereinafter referred to as the "Board") and
the Granite Education Association, Inc. (hereinafter referred to as the "Association") hereby
agree as follows:

                                          ARTICLE 1

                                         DEFINITIONS

1.1    Teacher shall mean all professional employees of the District who are paid on the
       teacher salary schedule and who are required to be and are licensed by the State Board of
       Education, including teachers on leave of absence, granted pursuant to this Agreement,
       and excluding district administrative coordinators and all employees who are paid from
       the administrative salary schedule.

1.2    Provisional Contract Teacher shall mean all regularly assigned teachers working half-
       time or more each day who have not yet completed three continuous years of contract
       employment as a teacher in Granite School District. Regular contract teachers who have
       an interruption in service of six years or more shall be provisional contract teachers for
       the first year following their return.

1.3    Regular Contract Teacher shall mean all regularly assigned teachers (except specially
       funded program teachers), working half-time or more each day, and who have completed
       the provisional period described above.

1.4    Temporary Teacher shall mean all teachers who are employed after the first day of the
       second semester and all other teachers hired on a limited short-term basis. Temporary
       teachers are not covered by this Agreement.

1.5    Part-time Teacher shall mean all teachers who are employed less than half-time each
       day. Part-time teachers are not covered by this Agreement and are not eligible for fringe
       benefits.

1.6    Specially Funded Program Teacher shall mean all teachers who do not have regular
       contract teacher status in the District immediately prior to being hired to staff special
       programs that are funded by agencies other than the District. Specially funded program
       teachers are covered by this Agreement and are eligible for fringe benefits. Any
       discontinuance or curtailment of funds by the program's funding agency shall constitute
       the discontinuance of a particular service (i.e. program) within the meaning of Section
       53A-8-107 Utah Code, justifying the nonrenewal of employment contracts for the
       teachers in that program as a necessary staff reduction.

1.7    Association shall mean the Granite Education Association.




                                                3
1.8    District shall mean the Granite School District in the County of Salt Lake and State of
       Utah.

1.9    Board shall mean the Granite School District Board of Education.

1.10   School Year shall mean the period of time established by the official school calendar
       adopted by the Board.

1.11   Seniority shall mean length of continuous and current employment as a teacher under
       contract in the District.

1.12   Semester hours includes the computational equivalent in quarter hours (quarter hours *
       2/3 = semester hours or semester hours * 3/2 = quarter hours).


                                           ARTICLE 2

                                    GENERAL PROVISIONS

2.1    In line with the Board's policy of not discriminating against any teacher on the basis of
       race; religion; color; sex; national origin; or disability, and the Association's policy of
       admitting persons to membership without discrimination on the basis of race; religion;
       color; sex; national origin; or disability, it is agreed that none of these conditions will be
       preconditions of employment. It is further agreed that the Board shall not discriminate
       against a teacher on the basis of membership, non-membership, or official position in any
       teacher organization.

2.2    This Agreement shall be a part of each individual teacher's contract.

2.3    The Board, the Association, all teachers covered by this Agreement, and all provisions of
       this Agreement are subject to the laws and Constitution of the State of Utah and of the
       United States, and to the regulations and orders of state and federal governmental
       agencies. Any provisions of this Agreement found to be in violation of such laws,
       regulations, and orders shall be null and void; however, this section shall not operate to
       impair any Agreement or contract during the term of the Agreement of contract.

2.4    Pursuant to state law, the Board may enter into individual employment contracts without
       violating this Agreement.




                                                 4
                                          ARTICLE 3

                                BOARD OF EDUCATION
                             RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

3.1   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Agreement, the Board retains and
      reserves unto itself the sole and exclusive right to the executive management and
      administrative control of the school system, along with all other rights, powers, authority,
      duties, and responsibilities conferred upon and vested in it by the laws and Constitution
      of the State of Utah and the United States, including, but not limited to, the following
      rights and responsibilities:

      3.1.1   to determine and administer policy;

      3.1.2   to establish courses of instruction, including special programs, and to provide for
              athletic, recreational and social events for students;

      3.1.3   to hire all teachers and, subject to the provisions of law, to determine their
              qualifications and the conditions for their continued employment, or their
              dismissal or demotion, and to promote and transfer all such employees;

      3.1.4   to determine the responsibilities and assignments of teachers;

      3.1.5   to make and enforce all needful rules and regulations for the control and
              management of the public schools of the District;

      3.1.6   to do all things needful for the maintenance, prosperity, and success of the schools
              and the promotion of education.

3.2   The Board recognizes the role of professional educators in determining and providing for
      the educational needs of students. Therefore, the Board will provide opportunities for the
      involvement and participation of teachers individually and through the Association in
      planning and developing the best possible programs for students and teachers of the
      District.

                                          ARTICLE 4

                                        RECOGNITION

4.1   Representative. The Board recognizes the Association as the exclusive representative of
      the teachers provided, however, any individual teacher shall have the right to present
      grievances with or without representation by the Association, in accordance with the
      Grievance Procedure provided herein (see Article 6); and provided further, that nothing
      in this Agreement shall be so construed as to deprive any individual of his or her rights
      under the Utah Right to Work Law.




                                                5
4.2   Bargaining Unit. The appropriate unit for purposes of negotiating terms and conditions
      of employment is comprised of all teachers, as herein defined, employed by the Granite
      School District.

4.3   Continued Recognition. The Board shall continue to recognize the Association as the
      exclusive representative for the term of this Agreement or any renewal thereof, provided,
      however, that if the Board has cause to believe that a majority of the members of the
      bargaining unit have not designated or selected the Association as their representative,
      the Board may request and shall be furnished (by the Association) with proof of such
      designation or selection by such majority. If the Association fails to provide such proof, it
      shall not be recognized as the exclusive representative of the teachers.

                                         ARTICLE 5

                                       NEGOTIATIONS

5.1   Negotiating Teams. The Board, or designated representatives appointed to serve on its
      team, will meet with representatives designated by the Association for the purpose of
      establishing procedures for negotiating and reaching mutually satisfactory agreements.
      Each party's negotiating team shall consist of not more than five members.

5.2   A meeting to open negotiations will be held no later than the first day of April.

5.3   Schedule of Meetings. Negotiations will be conducted at times and places mutually
      agreeable to the negotiators named by each party.

5.4   Before negotiations begin on specific items, the Association shall submit, in writing,
      specific initial proposals on any items it wishes to negotiate. The Board shall respond
      within two weeks with specific written proposals to open for negotiation any items the
      Board wishes to negotiate that may not have been included among the initial proposals of
      the Association. After this initial exchange of proposals, no new subjects for negotiation
      may be introduced by either party without mutual consent. The initial proposals of both
      parties shall constitute the agenda, with the discussion order to be jointly agreed upon
      before negotiations begin on specific items.

5.5   Conducting Negotiations. The negotiation teams will meet in closed sessions, unless
      otherwise agreed upon mutually in advance. All proposals must be channeled through the
      negotiation teams at the table. The teams will present relevant data, exchange points of
      view, and make proposals and counterproposals. Upon request by either party, the other
      shall make available for inspection its public records and data pertinent to the subject
      under negotiation.

5.6   Consultants. Either party may utilize the services of consultants to assist in negotiations.

5.7   Release from other Duties. If negotiations are scheduled during the school day, the
      negotiators shall be released from regular duties without loss of pay.



                                                6
5.8    Adopting Agreement. To reach tentative agreement, all understandings must be reduced
       to writing, dated, and signed by both parties at the time tentative agreement is reached.
       All such agreements achieved in process will remain tentative pending completion of an
       agreement on the entire package. Tentative agreement on the entire package must also be
       reduced to writing and signed by both parties at the time the complete tentative
       agreement is reached. Such agreements shall be recommended to the Board and the
       Association for approval by both negotiating teams. The complete agreement shall
       become final upon ratification by the Board and the Association.

5.9    Impasse. If agreement is not reached on all items, either party may declare to the other in
       writing that an impasse exists and call for a mediator. A written request for mediation
       shall be considered a joint request, and the other party shall join in the request.

       5.9.1   Mediation.

               5.9.1.1 Within ten days after declaration of an impasse, both parties shall submit
                       the items at impasse to a mediator through the Federal Mediation and
                       Conciliation Service.

               5.9.1.2 The mediator shall endeavor to assist the parties in overcoming the
                       impasse and reaching agreement on the issues at impasse. His or her
                       efforts shall be limited to the issues at impasse.

               5.9.1.3 The parties agree to cooperate with the mediator by meeting with him or
                       her promptly and making available at his or her request any public records
                       and data pertinent to the issues at impasse.

       5.9.2   In the event that mediation efforts are not successful in resolving the issues, both
               parties shall make such further efforts to reach agreement as mutually agreed to
               by both negotiating teams.

5. 10 The rules of procedure listed in this article may be changed at any time by mutual consent
      of both teams.

                                           ARTICLE 6

                                  GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

6.1    Definition. Grievance shall mean a complaint by a teacher that there has been an alleged
       violation, misinterpretation, or misapplication of any of the provisions of this Agreement
       affecting that teacher.

6.2    Procedure. It is the intent of the District and the Association to attempt to resolve all
       grievances promptly, informally and confidentially, at the lowest possible administrative
       level, in accordance with the following procedure:



                                                 7
6.2.1   Step One - Oral Grievance

        6.2.1.1 The teacher with a grievance must first attempt to resolve it informally by
                discussing the issue with the principal within ten working days after the
                teacher became aware of the act or condition upon which the grievance is
                based.

        6.2.1.2 The principal shall have up to 10 working days after thus learning of the
                grievance to consider the matter and give the principal’s answer orally to
                the employee.

6.2.2   Step Two - Written Grievance

        6.2.2.1 If the grievance is not resolved informally in step one, the teacher may file
                the grievance with the principal in writing within ten working days after
                receiving the answer in step one.

        6.2.2.2 The written grievance shall:

               A.      describe the nature of the grievance and the facts giving rise to it;
               B.      note the provisions alleged to be violated, misinterpreted, or
                       misapplied and the position of the teacher with respect to such
                       provisions; and
               C.      state the specific remedy requested to resolve the grievance.

        6.2.2.3 The principal shall have up to 10 working days after receiving the written
                grievance to investigate the matter, make a decision, and communicate the
                decision in writing to the teacher.

6.2.3   Step Three - Appeal of Written Grievance

        6.2.3.1 If no mutually agreeable settlement is reached in step two, the teacher may
                file the grievance with the Association, and the Association may submit
                the written grievance to the Superintendent within 10 working days after
                receiving the answer in step two, requesting that the principal's decision be
                reviewed.

        6.2.3.2 The Superintendent or the Superintendent’s designee shall assign a
                grievance examiner within ten working days after receiving the written
                grievance from the Association.

        6.2.3.3 The grievance examiner shall schedule a hearing not fewer than ten
                working days, nor more than 20 working days, after receiving the
                assignment, except upon mutual agreement between the parties.




                                          8
        6.2.3.4 The grievance examiner shall receive and review such evidence as the
                parties present that is relevant to the grievance and shall thereupon
                determine the facts of the matter; whether or not the Agreement has been
                violated, misinterpreted, or misapplied; and report these determinations
                with recommendations to the Superintendent or the Superintendent’s
                designee within five working days following the meeting.

        6.2.3.5 The Superintendent or the Superintendent’s designee shall make a
                decision within ten working days after receiving the grievance examiner’s
                report and communicate the decision in writing to the parties concerned.

6.2.4   Step Four - Impartial Third-Party Hearing

        6.2.4.1 In the event that no mutually agreeable settlement is reached in the
                foregoing procedure, the teacher may, within 15 working days after
                receiving the decision of the Superintendent or his or her designee in step
                three, request that the Association file a petition in the Superintendent’s
                office requesting that the matter be referred to an impartial third party
                from outside the District for his or her review and recommendations.

        6.2.4.2 Representatives of the Superintendent and the Association shall agree
                upon an impartial third party hearing examiner from outside the District
                within ten working days after receipt of notice of referral. The hearing
                examiner shall be notified of his/ her selection by a joint letter from the
                District and the Association stating the issue(s) and requesting that he or
                she set a date and time for the hearing.

        6.2.4.3 The hearing examiner shall have no authority to amend, modify, nullify,
                ignore, add to, or subtract from the provisions of this Agreement. His or
                her authority shall be strictly limited to making a recommendation to the
                Board regarding only the specific issue or issues submitted to him or her
                in writing by the District and the Association. The examiner shall have no
                authority to make recommendations on any other issue not so submitted to
                him or her. The examiner shall have no power to make recommendations
                contrary to or inconsistent with the law. The examiner's recommendations
                to the Board must be based solely upon his or her interpretation of the
                meaning or application of the express relevant language of this Agreement
                to the facts of the grievance presented. The hearing examiner shall submit
                his or her recommendations in writing to the teacher, the District, and the
                Association within 20 working days after the close of the hearing or the
                submission of agreed upon briefs by the parties, whichever is later, unless
                the parties agree to an extension thereof.

        6.2.4.4 In the hearing, neither party shall be permitted to introduce any evidence
                which was not presented in steps one through three. In the event that new




                                          9
                     evidence is discovered that might have bearing on the grievance, the
                     grievance will return to step two.

              6.2.4.5 The recommendation of the hearing examiner to the Board shall be
                      advisory only. The Board shall make a final disposition of the case within
                      20 working days after receiving the recommendation(s) of the hearing
                      examiner, unless the parties agree to an extension. The decision of the
                      Board shall be submitted in writing to all parties, and shall be final and
                      binding on all parties to the grievance, provided the Board in its decision
                      does not exceed its authority as established in the law.

              6.2.4.6 Expenses for the hearing examiner's services shall be shared equally by
                      the District and the Association for grievances brought by the Association
                      but not for grievances brought by teachers or other associations in their
                      own behalf. In those situations, the teacher, or association representing
                      the teacher, will be responsible to share the costs with the District.

              6.2.4.7 Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of the teacher to appeal
                      the Board's decision to an appropriate court of law.

6.3   General Provisions

      6.3.1   Group Grievance. A grievance may be initiated in behalf of a group of teachers
              by the Association or by any member of the group designated by them to serve as
              their representative. Whoever initiates a grievance in behalf of a group shall begin
              at step one if all members of the group are in the same school. If the members of
              the group are in different schools, the group grievance may begin at step three.
              Group grievances shall list by name the teachers in whose behalf and with whose
              consent the grievance is filed.

      6.3.2   Individual Complaint. Nothing contained herein may be construed as limiting
              the right of a teacher with a complaint to have the complaint adjusted without
              recourse to the grievance procedure and with or without representation by the
              Association, provided that the adjustment is consistent with the terms of this
              Agreement. When a teacher is not represented by the Association, the Association
              will have the opportunity to be present beyond the level of the principal or
              immediate supervisor.

      6.3.3   Time Limits. No grievance shall be entertained or processed unless it is
              submitted within 10 working days after the teacher became aware of the act or
              condition upon which the grievance is based. If the principal or the District does
              not answer a grievance or an appeal thereof within the specified time limit, or
              mutually agreed extension thereof, the teacher involved may move the grievance
              to the next step. If the teacher does not advance a grievance to the next step within
              the specified time limit, or mutually agreed extension thereof, following the date




                                               10
              when a district decision was due or given, the grievance shall be considered
              withdrawn without prejudice.

      6.3.4   Meetings and Representation

              6.3.4.1 Meetings specified under this procedure shall be conducted at times and
                      places which will afford a fair and reasonable opportunity for all necessary
                      persons, including witnesses, to attend. Such meetings shall be conducted
                      during non-working hours unless there is mutual agreement for other
                      arrangements.

              6.3.4.2 In any grievance meetings, all of the parties directly involved shall have
                      the right to be accompanied, advised, or represented by a person of their
                      own choosing.

              6.3.4.3 Meetings beyond step one, specified under this procedure, will not be held
                      without prior notification to the Association or without providing the
                      opportunity for an Association representative to be present.

      6.3.5   Reprisals. No reprisal of any kind will be taken by the Board, the administration,
              the Association, or by a teacher against any of the participants in a grievance
              procedure by reason of such participation.

      6.3.6   Grievance File. All documents, communications, and records dealing with
              grievances will be filed in a separate grievance file and will not be kept in the
              District personnel file of any of the participants.

      6.3.7   Sharing of Information. The Board and the Association agree to make available
              to all parties in interest any information in their possession which is not privileged
              under law, but which may have a bearing on decisions reached at any step of the
              grievance procedure.

      6.3.8   Grievance Forms. See Appendix B for sample grievance forms. Grievance forms
              may be obtained at the Human Resources office, the Association office and at
              each school.

6.4   Informal Hearing Procedures

      6.4.1   An informal hearing means a meeting between a teacher covered by the
              Agreement and the Assistant Superintendent or the Assistant Superintendent’s
              designee (other than the direct supervisor of the teacher’s administrator) of the
              teacher’s Division.

      6.4.2   Teachers claiming that records in their personnel files are inaccurate are entitled
              to an informal hearing pursuant to Article 15.3.5. Teachers who are suspended
              with or without pay are entitled to an informal hearing pursuant to Article 19.3.



                                               11
      6.4.3   In informal hearings, all parties directly involved shall have the right to be
              accompanied, advised, or represented by a person of their own choosing.
              Informal hearings shall not be held without providing adequate notice of the
              hearing to the Association and opportunity for the Association to participate in the
              hearing.

              The Assistant Superintendent, or the Assistant Superintendent’s designee who
              will conduct the informal hearing, may establish reasonable procedures to
              facilitate clarity and order. Such procedures may include time-allotments, order
              of presentation, etc. If the Assistant Superintendent, or the Assistant
              Superintendent’s designee, elects to establish procedures for a particular informal
              hearing, those procedures shall be communicated to all parties in a timely manner.

      6.4.4   The Assistant Superintendent or the Assistant Superintendent’s designee shall
              make a decision within ten working days after the informal hearing and
              communicate the decision in writing to the teacher.

                                         ARTICLE 7

                                       EMPLOYMENT

7.1   Periods of Employment. The days of employment within the period set out in the
      contract shall be designated by the Board in the official school calendar.

7.2   Basis for Determining Salaries. Each teacher's annual contract salary shall be
      determined by placement on the salary schedule according to verified experience and
      training as follows:

      7.2.1   Salary Credit for Experience

              7.2.1.1 Salary Step Placement upon Employment. An experienced teacher shall
                      receive full credit on the salary schedule for the first ten years of public
                      school teaching experience. Half-time (.50 FTE or more) regular contract
                      teaching experience will be figured cumulatively in arriving at proper step
                      placement. When there is a shortage of qualified candidates for a specific
                      position, additional step credit for verified experience beyond ten years
                      may be allowed by the Human Resources office.

              7.2.1.2 Salary schedule credit for teaching experience under 7.2.1.1 above shall be
                      granted automatically for full-time contracted teaching in a public school.
                      All other teaching experience shall be evaluated by the Human Resources
                      office and the amount of credit granted shall depend upon the extent to
                      which such experience is equivalent to public school teaching. All credited
                      teaching experience must be officially verified.




                                               12
        7.2.1.3 Annual Increments. Continuing teachers shall receive a one-step salary
                increment on the salary schedule for each year of successful teaching in
                the District until they reach the maximum step of their salary lane. Such
                salary increments shall be given at the beginning of each contract year by
                moving forward one step on the salary schedule all continuing contract
                teachers who successfully completed at least one-half year (.50 FTE) of
                contract teaching during the previous school year.

        7.2.1.4 Contract teachers returning from military leave shall be granted credit on
                the salary schedule at the following rate: One step on the salary schedule
                for each year of military service, or major part thereof, not to exceed three
                years' credit.

7.2.2   Salary Credit for Training

        7.2.2.1 Within thirty days following beginning date of employment, a teacher new
                to the District must supply the District Human Resources office and the
                principal with official, up-to-date transcripts of all college credits.
                Transcripts become the property of the District and are not returned upon
                termination of employment.

        7.2.2.2 Placement on the A Lane (Bachelor’s), D Lane (Master’s), or G Lane
                (Doctorate) is dependent upon verification of the degree and a teaching
                certificate. Credit to be applied toward the B Lane (Bachelor’s plus 20
                semester hours) and the C Lane (Bachelor’s plus 40 semester hours) must
                have been earned subsequent to meeting the requirements for the
                Bachelor’s degree and a teaching certificate. Credit to be applied toward
                the E Lane (Master’s plus 20 semester hours) and the F Lane (Master’s
                plus 40 semester hours) must have been earned subsequent to meeting the
                requirements for the Master’s degree and a teaching certificate. The
                employee must furnish evidence that all of the degree requirements have
                been met. All college credit must be granted by a four-year college or
                university which has been accredited by the National Council for the
                Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE), or by one of the six
                regional accrediting associations. (Exception: Lane change credit shall be
                given for credit from Salt Lake Community College.)

        7.2.2.3 Application for lane advancement on the salary schedule must be made on
                the official form provided by the Human Resources office (see Appendix
                C.) Applications must be supported by complete official transcripts of
                credit (report cards will not suffice), verifying the credit requested. Lane
                change will become effective on the date the completed application form,
                and all official documentation forms, are received by the Human
                Resources office. The lane change will be made on the next payroll cutoff
                date, and the salary increase will be reflected on the paycheck following
                that payroll cutoff date. The total amount paid for the year from the new



                                         13
                     lane will be prorated based upon the number of contract working days
                     remaining as of the date when all necessary materials are received by the
                     Human Resources office.

              7.2.2.4 Non-CACTUS Credit. Upon recommendation of the Educator Support
                      and Development office, non-CACTUS credit may be used toward any
                      one- lane advancement on the salary schedule.

              7.2.2.5 In-service credit may be used in qualifying for salary lane advancement
                      according to the following provisions:

                     A.     All CACTUS approved in-service credit will count towards lane
                            change.

                     B.     Evidence of credit (e.g. transcripts, USOE CACTUS report, etc.) is
                            to be submitted to Human Resources, and is the responsibility of
                            the teacher.

                     C.     Lane change appeals will be directed to the Human Resources
                            office.

7.3   Payment of Salaries

      7.3.1   Paychecks will be made available to employees on the last district working day of
              each month, except as may be otherwise provided below.

      7.3.2   December paychecks will be issued prior to Winter Recess for employees who
              have no further working days in December.

      7.3.3   When paychecks are given out prior to the end of the month in accordance with
              the above provisions, payments of withholdings to the credit union, annuity
              companies, and various other insurance agencies will not necessarily be remitted
              on the day paychecks are issued.

      7.3.4   All employees paid from the teachers’ salary schedule, who by regular
              assignment, must travel between two or more district schools or approved
              locations on the same day will receive an automobile allowance each month for
              the term of their contract. The amount of the monthly car allowance for each
              qualifying teacher will depend on the number of days each week that the teacher
              is regularly assigned to two or more locations:

                     Two or More Locations
                     5 Days Per Week    $90.00            2 Days Per Week        $36.00
                     4 Days Per Week    $72.00            1 Day Per Week         $18.00
                     3 Days Per Week    $54.00




                                              14
              In addition to the above automobile allowances, all employees of the District are
              entitled to mileage reimbursement according to the terms of Administrative
              Memorandum Number Thirty Five.

7.4   Teaching License

      7.4.1   Before reporting for duty, teachers employed under this Agreement shall comply
              with all necessary licensure and/or endorsement requirements of the Utah State
              Board of Education.

      7.4.2   The licenses specified above must be registered with the Human Resources within
              thirty days following the beginning date of employment.

7.5   Performance of Duties

      7.5.1   The teacher agrees to follow the rules, regulations, and policies of the Board and
              to perform the duties assigned to the teacher under the direction of the principal
              and the Superintendent, at the time and place appointed by the Board or the
              Board's designee. Duties may not be assigned arbitrarily or capriciously.

      7.5.2   Acts in violation of this Agreement, or of the rules; regulations; and policies of
              the Board, or failure to perform duties assigned to the teacher, may constitute a
              breach of contract and subject the teacher to disciplinary action

      7.5.3   If a teacher is required to follow a Board policy, or perform a duty that the teacher
              believes to be in violation of this Agreement, the appropriate course of action for
              the teacher is to use the grievance procedure provided herein.

7.6   Continued Employment

      7.6.1   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Agreement, regular contract
              teachers doing satisfactory work will be continued in employment on a year-to-
              year basis until they retire.

      7.6.2   Provisional contract teachers and specially funded program teachers shall sign the
              District's Special Employment Contract.

      7.6.3   Provisional contract teachers are employed for a specified period of time only, as
              defined in the Special Employment Contract that they sign. Provisional contract
              teachers shall have no right or expectation of continued employment beyond the
              term specified in their Special Employment Contract. (See Appendix D.)

      7.6.4   Specially Funded Program teachers doing satisfactory work, who have completed
              their three-year provisional period, may expect continued employment in
              successive years, unless there is a curtailment or discontinuance of funds in their
              program. Any such curtailment or discontinuance of funds shall justify non-



                                               15
              renewal of teacher contracts in that program. Such non-renewals shall not be
              considered a violation of this Agreement and the teachers involved shall not be
              entitled to a formal hearing under the Utah Orderly School Termination
              Procedures Act.

7.7   Determination of Contract Full-Time Equivalency (FTE) for Secondary Teachers

      7.7.1   The determination of contract FTE for secondary teachers shall be based on the
              number of teaching periods or teaching blocks assigned. Thus, in a school with a
              seven-period day, where the normal full-time load is six teaching periods plus one
              consultation/ preparation period per day (see 9.8), a teacher with only three
              teaching periods will be on a .5 FTE contract.

              Examples to illustrate the concept, based on a seven-period school day:

                       Teaching      Proportion of       FTE          Contract
                        Periods       Full-Time                        Status
                           1             1/6              .17           No
                           2             2/6              .33           No
                           3             3/6              .50           Yes
                           4             4/6              .67           Yes
                           5             5/6              .83           Yes
                           6             6/6             1.00           Yes

      7.7.2   In a school with an eight-period day, where the normal full-time load is three
              double teaching periods (blocks) and one double consultation/preparation period
              (block) per day, a teacher with only two double teaching periods will be on a .67
              contract.

              Examples to illustrate the concept, based on an eight-period (block) school day:

                       Teaching    Proportion of         FTE          Contract
                        Periods     Full-Time                          Status
                     1 (2 periods)     2/6                .33           No
                     2 (4 periods)     4/6                .67           Yes
                     3 (6 periods)     6/6               1.00           Yes

      7.7.3   This approach has the effect of pro-rating the consultation/preparation period for
              teachers working less than full-time. Contract teachers with less than full-time
              FTE will be expected to perform their prorated share of consultation/preparation
              time, and to assume their pro-rated share of necessary professional duties.

      7.7.4   Contractual leave benefits will be extended to cover the extra period for teachers
              who have agreed to teach an extra period during the regular school day.




                                               16
      7.7.5   In the event the Board of Education approves a school-day schedule different
              from the day described in 7.7.1 or 7.7.2, the District and Association will jointly
              develop an FTE calculation grid.

                                          ARTICLE 8

                                   TEACHER FACILITIES

8.1   Each school will be provided with well-ventilated, clean, adequate, separate rest rooms
      for men and women teachers.

8.2   There shall be a furnished room in each school to be used as a faculty lounge.

8.3   Each school shall have telephone service available to teachers that provides privacy of
      conversation.

8.4   Space in the parking lot at each school will be reserved for the parking of teachers' cars.

                                          ARTICLE 9

                       TEACHING HOURS AND TEACHING LOAD

9.1   Teachers shall be required to work on the days specified in the official school calendar
      and according to the schedule of opening and closing schools as determined by the
      Board. Mandatory professional development days shall not be scheduled on Saturdays or
      Sundays. Except for special orientation meetings for new teachers, teachers who are
      required to work extra days before or after the dates specified in the official calendar
      shall receive additional compensation at their appropriate daily rate.

9.2   School Day

      9.2.1   Elementary teachers shall report to work no less than 20 minutes before the
              regular beginning time of the school day and shall remain on duty for at least 15
              minutes after the closing time of school.

      9.2.2   Secondary teachers shall report to work no less than 30 minutes before the regular
              beginning time of the school day and shall remain on duty for at least 20 minutes
              after the regular closing time of school. In schools starting before 8:00 a.m., these
              time provisions may be reversed.

9.3   Faculty Meeting. The principal, in consultation with the School Building Professional
      Committee, will make decisions relating to faculty meetings.

      9.3.1   Faculty meetings shall not exceed more than one per month, except when cleared
              by a School Accountability Director and /or in the event of an emergency.




                                               17
      9.3.2   Faculty meetings are to be used to manage the logistical operations of the school
              and to enhance communication with the faculty. Faculty meeting is not to be used
              for professional development.

9.4   Duty Free Lunch. All teachers shall have an uninterrupted, duty-free lunch period of at
      least 30 minutes daily (not counting passing time [effective the 05-06 school year]),
      except for teachers with assigned lunch-time responsibilities. Assigned supervisory duty,
      or other duty, shall not exceed 10 minutes in any lunch period.

      9.4.1   In order to assist in lunch-time supervisory duties, and to reduce and minimize the
              number of lunch-time duties for teachers, the District will budget an amount of
              money annually for lunch supervision programs. The total amount will be
              determined in negotiations and will be allocated to the schools on an as-need
              basis.

      9.4.2   At the elementary level, principals will use allocated funds to hire part-time
              teacher aides (if available) to assist in lunch-time supervisory duties. If no aides
              can be hired for this purpose, teachers who agree to perform the duties otherwise
              assigned to the aides will be compensated at the Secondary Lunch Monitor rate
              (Classified Lane dd) until an aide can be hired.

      9.4.3   At the secondary level, teachers who agree to perform extra lunch-time duties in
              order to reduce lunch-time duties for other teachers will be compensated at the
              Secondary Lunch Monitor rate (Classified Lane dd).

9.5   Normally, secondary teachers will spend preparation and consultation periods at the
      school. However, teachers may on occasion be excused by the principal, or the principal's
      designee, to utilize other facilities for school-related professional purposes to aid the
      teacher in meeting the needs of students.

9.6   When another teacher is in charge of an elementary teacher's class, the regularly assigned
      teacher, under guidelines formulated by the staff and approved by the principal, may
      leave the classroom and use that time as a preparation period, or for other professional
      purposes.

9.7   Only in case of emergency will teachers be required to serve as substitutes. Insofar as
      administratively possible, such emergency substituting assignments will be distributed
      among all faculty members. Emergency in this subsection shall mean an unscheduled or
      unplanned event, or an unforeseen combination of circumstances, that calls for immediate
      action.

      In the event that a substitute teacher is not provided for a contract teacher who has
      requested a substitute for a sick personal or sick family day prior to 6:30 a.m., the
      absence will result in a “failed-to-fill.” In such situations, when contract teachers are
      asked to cover the failed-to-fill, they shall be paid a prorated share of the Level V
      substitute teacher rate. Secondary teachers who cover the failed-to-fill during what



                                               18
       would have been their paid consultation period will coordinate with their supervisor to
       fulfill the contractual obligation.

9.8    The teaching load for secondary teachers shall not exceed six teaching periods a day. The
       normal teaching assignment for secondary teachers is not more than three teaching
       preparations and not more than two subject areas. The seventh period shall be used for
       consultation, preparation, or for other professional purposes.

                                          ARTICLE 10

  CLASS-FREE PLANNING & PREPARATION TIME FOR ELEMENTARY TEACHERS

10. 1 Elementary students K through six (6) will be dismissed from school one hour and forty
      minutes early one day a week.

10.2   Class-free planning and preparation time shall be used by teachers for planning and
       preparation activities, with the objective of improving instruction, meeting the needs of
       individual children, and improving the coordination of school programs and activities.

       An increase in elementary planning and collaboration time will be added to the one (1)
       hour and 45 minutes per week currently allotted to teachers. Each teacher will be given
       an additional 45-minute block of time weekly—two times per month will be dedicated to
       teacher planning time and two times per month will be for collaboration time. In the
       event that the 45-minute planning time falls during an assembly, or other scheduled
       activities, the principal will arrange coverage for the teacher’s students, thus guaranteeing
       that the teacher will still receive his or her planning time. This will be accomplished
       without burdening another teacher for supervision.




                                                19
                                                    Monthly Schedule
                               Regular Weekday                                             Short day
              During the day          45 minutes planning
Week 1        (specialist)            time                         Short day    (15 min after-school contract time)
                                                                                + 45 minutes collaboration time
                                                                                + 60 minutes planning time


              During the day          45 minutes planning
Week 2        (specialist)            time                         Short day    (15 min after-school contract time)

                                                                                + 105 minutes planning time


              During the day          45 minutes planning
Week 3        (specialist)            time                         Short day    (15 min after-school contract time)
                                                                                + 45 minutes collaboration time
                                                                                + 60 minutes planning time


              During the day          45 minutes planning
Week 4        (specialist)            time                         Short day    (15 min after-school contract time)
                                                                                + 105 minutes planning time


If - Week     During the day          45 minutes planning
5             (specialist)            time                         Short day    (15 min after-school contract time)
                                                                                + 105 minutes planning time


                       Total 4 week month planning time is 510 minutes (8.5 hours) and 90 minutes collaboration time




10.3        Normally, elementary teachers will spend planning and preparation time at the school.
            However, teachers may on occasion be excused by the principal, or the principal's
            designee, to utilize other facilities for school-related professional purposes to aid the
            teacher in meeting the needs of students.

10.4        Planning time shall not be used for faculty meetings.

10.5        In-service shall not be held during planning time.

10.6        Special education teachers and resource teachers, whose contract and work assignments
            are the same hours as those of regular classroom teachers, will participate in class-free
            planning and preparation times during the same hours and on the same basis as regular
            classroom teachers. Instrumental music teachers assigned to an elementary school on
            planning and preparation time will participate in planning and preparation times at the
            school.




                                                                  20
                                          ARTICLE 11

                                  TEACHING ASSIGNMENTS

11.1   With the exception of teachers being transferred or in the event of district program or
       staffing adjustments, returning teachers shall be notified in writing of their school,
       tentative program, schedule, or grade level assignment for the ensuing year not later than
       May 1 (elementary) and May 15 (secondary). Consultation with the teacher shall take
       place before any written assignment is made.

11.2   In order to assure that students are taught by teachers working within their areas of
       competence, teachers shall not, under normal conditions, be assigned outside the scope of
       their teaching licenses and endorsements.

11.3   District seniority of teachers shall be considered for purposes of school, schedule,
       program, grade level, or year round track assignments.

11.4   All regular contract teachers at a school site shall have the opportunity to apply for
       reassignment to any available position at the school site, prior to the position being filled
       (through June 1).

11.5   The Board and the Association recognize that a teacher's primary responsibility is to
       teach.

11.6   Changes in teaching assignments during the school year should be avoided. Enrollment
       changes or other unforeseen circumstances may, however, make it necessary for the
       principal to make changes in teaching assignments during the year.


                                          ARTICLE 12

                             DISRUPTIVE STUDENT BEHAVIOR

The Board, Administration, and Association believe that educators need to be able to teach
without disruptions from disorderly students and are in full support of teachers, principals, and
school staff in their duties to operate safe, orderly schools and classrooms under reasonable rules
governing school conduct. Appropriate disciplinary measures should be assessed to students
when students make false allegations against an employee that have an affect or impact on the
teacher’s employment. Refer to Administrative Memo #106.




                                                21
                                          ARTICLE 13

                     PROTECTION OF TEACHERS FROM ASSAULTS

13.1   Teachers shall report, in writing as soon as possible to their principal /supervisor, any
       assault suffered in connection with their employment. The principal/supervisor will
       forward a copy to School Accountability Services. The Superintendent and a law
       enforcement agency shall be notified of any such assault.

13.2   If criminal or civil proceedings are brought against a teacher, alleging that he or she
       committed an assault in connection with his or her employment, such teacher, after
       making the reports described in Article 13.1 above, may request the Board to furnish
       legal counsel to defend him/ her in such proceedings, insofar as the interest of the teacher
       and the District are not conflicting. If the teacher is found guilty or liable in such
       proceedings, such finding shall constitute a cause for dismissal from the school system.
       Fines, damages, penalties, or forfeitures shall not be paid by the Board.

13.3   Civil liability insurance coverage shall be provided for each teacher. Costs of this
       coverage shall be paid by the Board. Civil liability insurance coverage shall not be
       deemed to provide payment for fines, penalties, or forfeitures arising out of criminal
       proceedings.

13.4   Whenever a teacher is absent from his or her assignment as a result of personal injury
       caused by an assault arising out of and in the course of his or her employment, he or she
       shall be paid his or her full salary for the period of such absence not to exceed 180
       contract days and such paid absence shall in no event be deducted from any sick or
       personal leave to which such teacher is entitled.

13.5   The Board agrees to reimburse the teacher the market value of any personal property
       damaged or destroyed as a result of assault suffered in connection with his or her
       employment.

13.6   Time for appearance before a judicial body or legal authority lost by a teacher in
       connection with an assault case in connection with his or her employment as a teacher in
       the District, shall result in no loss of wages or reduction in accumulated leave.


                                          ARTICLE 14

                                   TEACHER EVALUATION

14.1   Teachers will be evaluated under the provisions of the Educator Evaluation Law, Title
       53A Chapter 10. Utah Code. (See Appendix E.)

14.2   Copies of all formative and summative teacher evaluations will be given to the teacher
       for his or her personal file. Teacher signatures on such reports and records indicate a



                                                22
       knowledge of the contents and do not signify approval. The teacher shall have the right
       to attach or submit an explanation, or other written statement regarding any formative or
       summative evaluation, for inclusion with it in his or her file.

14.3   Summative evaluations, or formative evaluations which could lead to corrective
       discipline, shall only be conducted by fully licensed administrative personnel.


                                          ARTICLE 15

                                        TEACHER FILES

15.1   The official teacher file is the one maintained in the Human Resources office. Materials
       from files kept in a school shall be used primarily for the improvement of a teacher's
       performance. These files shall be maintained in accordance with 15.3. Documentation
       regarding unsatisfactory performance in the District shall be removed from all school
       files after three years of satisfactory performance and from all district files after five
       years of satisfactory performance.

       Documentation regarding improper teacher conduct in the following areas will remain in
       the file:

              · Conduct which violates the law.
              · Physical contact with students.
              · Conduct involving drugs or alcohol.
              · Sexual conduct.

       Exception: Documentation regarding improper teacher conduct in the above areas will
       be removed from the file if the teacher has been exonerated of all charges.

15.2   A teacher’s file will only be maintained in the District Human Resources Office for as
       long as a person is employed and for five years following his or her termination. At that
       time, the file will be removed to another storage space and maintained for an additional
       ten years. After that, the file will be destroyed.

15.3   All teacher personnel files shall be maintained under the following conditions:

       15.3.1 Materials shall be available to the teacher at his or her request for inspection
              except as noted in 15.3.4 below.

       15.3.2 No unfavorable entry shall be made in a teacher's file unless the teacher has had
              an opportunity to read the material before the end of the school year during which
              the principal became aware of the occurrence or condition upon which the entry is
              based. The teacher shall acknowledge that he or she has read such material by
              affixing his or her signature and the date on the copy to be filed. It is understood
              that the teacher's signature does not indicate agreement with the content of the



                                                23
              material and will serve only to verify that the material was shown to the teacher.
              If the teacher desires a copy of the material, the teacher may make and keep a
              copy.

              15.3.2.1        If a teacher refuses to affix his/ her signature on the copy to be
                              filed, such notation will be made on the material.

              15.3.2.2        Only documented statements shall be filed.

       15.3.3 The teacher shall have the right to answer any material filed, and his or her
              answer shall be reviewed by the Human Resources director and attached to the
              file copy.

       15.3.4 All legally privileged references and information shall be held in confidence and,
              therefore, are not subject to this Agreement and not available for inspection by the
              teacher. University placement files and references obtained from outside the
              District, or before a person is employed, is privileged material.

       15.3.5 Teachers who claim that material in their file is inaccurate shall be entitled to an
              informal hearing on the matter pursuant to Article 6.4. Material will be removed
              from the teacher's file when a teacher's claim that it is inaccurate has been
              sustained.

       15.3.6 Complaints, whether verbal or written, shall not be used as the basis for corrective
              action if the teacher has not received notice of the complaint and its detailed
              substance and had opportunity to respond to the supervisor within a reasonable
              period of time following the school or district’s receipt of the complaint.
              Teachers may request copies of written complaints or written summaries of verbal
              complaints.

              Hearsay shall not be used as the basis for actions which may be taken against a
              teacher.


                                          ARTICLE 16

              POSTING OF VACANCIES, TRANSFERS, AND PROMOTIONS

16.1   Posting of Vacancies

       16.1.1 Vacancy shall mean all newly-created, additional teaching positions and all
              continuing teaching positions that have been vacated by reason of resignation,
              retirement, dismissal, death, reassignment, or transfer.




                                                24
16.1.2 All vacancies for the following school year that become known before June 1 will
       be posted according to the following schedule. Exception: Vacancies that are
       filled by administrative transfer will not be posted.

16.1.3 Posting of Elementary Vacancies

       16.1.3.1      On the last district working day before April 1, the Human
                     Resources office will publish the first listing of known elementary
                     vacancies, together with job descriptions, that will occur for the
                     following school year.

       16.1.3.2      On the last district working day before June 1, the Human
                     Resources office will publish the final listing of known elementary
                     vacancies, together with job descriptions, that will occur for the
                     following year.

       16.1.3.3      Each Friday between April 1 and June 1, the Human Resources
                     office will publish additional listings of known elementary
                     vacancies, together with job descriptions, for the coming year.
                     Copies of all vacancy lists will be posted at the Human Resources
                     office on the date of publication.

16.1.4 Posting of Secondary Vacancies

       16.1.4.1      On the last district working day before April 20, the Human
                     Resources office will publish the first listing of known secondary
                     vacancies, together with job descriptions, that will occur for the
                     following school year. (Exception: High School Head coaching
                     positions for the following school year may be posted as soon as
                     the vacancy is declared.)

       16.1.4.2      On the last district working day before June 1, the Human
                     Resources office will publish the final listing of known secondary
                     vacancies, together with job descriptions, that will occur for the
                     following school year.

       16.1.4.3      Each Friday between April 20 and June 1, the Human Resources
                     office will publish additional listings of known secondary
                     vacancies, together with job descriptions, for the coming year.
                     Copies of all vacancy lists will be posted at the Human Resources
                     office on the date of publication.




                                      25
16.1.5 Posting of Positions for New Schools

              16.1.5.1        Staffing of positions in new schools may be exempted from the
                              above timelines and posted as vacancies, together with job
                              descriptions, on an earlier date (to be determined by the District)
                              after consultation with the Association.

16.2   Application for Transfer to a Posted Position

       16.2.1 Between April 1 and June 1 each year, all teachers in the District shall be eligible
              to apply for transfer to any specific position in another school that has been posted
              as a vacancy for the following school year, including those positions filled on a
              temporary basis after the first day of the second semester.

       16.2.2 Teachers desiring a transfer to a posted position must submit a written request to
              the Human Resources director stating the specific posted position, or positions,
              for which the teacher wishes to apply. Such requests shall be acknowledged in
              writing.

       16.2.3 The application deadline date shall be the fifth calendar date following
              publication and posting of the vacancy in the Human Resources office.

       16.2.4 Teachers wishing to be considered for transfer after June 1 may submit the
              Summer Transfer Request form (available in the Human Resources office) to the
              Human Resources office by June 15 for consideration. Once a transfer is granted,
              the Transfer Request Form will be removed from the transfer request file.


16.3   Procedures for Choosing Among Applicants for a Posted Position

       16.3.1 In filling non-promotional vacancies occurring within the teaching staff of the
              District, principals shall consider (A) the program and staffing needs of the
              school, and (B) the relative qualifications of the applicants for the available
              position.

       16.3.2 Selection among applicants to fill posted vacancies shall be based on the relative
              qualifications of the applicants, with the primary objective of selecting the
              applicant best qualified to fill the vacancy.

       16.3.3 If the principal determines that two or more applicants are equally well qualified
              for a vacant position, first consideration shall be given to applicants who are
              currently employed by the District.

       16.3.4 If a choice must be made among applicants currently employed by the District
              who have been determined by the principal to be equally well qualified for the




                                                26
              position, the teacher with the greatest length of continuous and current contract
              service in the District shall be appointed.

       16.3.5 No assignments of new teachers shall be made until the applications of teachers
              declared surplus, and teachers requesting transfer, have been considered.

       16.3.6 Each approved transferee, and principal involved, shall be notified of the transfer
              within ten days after the application deadline. In the event a transfer is not
              approved, the applicant may request written notice of the reason. If a teacher has
              questions about his or her transfer, the teacher may request an interview with the
              director of Human Resources and an appointment will be set.

16.4   Procedures for Determining which Teachers Will Be Declared Surplus

       16.4.1 Transfers of surplus teachers may become necessary at the end of the school year
              because of enrollment decline, school closure, or change in school program.

       16.4.2 When enrollment decline, school closure, or change in school program makes
              necessary the transfer of surplus teachers, a call for volunteers shall be made. If
              there are no volunteers, decisions as to which teachers will be declared surplus
              shall be based on the program and staffing needs of the school, and the relative
              qualifications of the teaching staff to fill the available positions.

       16.4.3 If a choice must be made between two or more teachers determined by the
              principal to be equally well qualified for an available position, the teacher with
              the least seniority in the District will be declared surplus.

       16.4.4 No teacher will be declared surplus without an explanation of the reasons for such
              action. Before recommending that a teacher be declared surplus, the principal will
              confer with the teacher involved to discuss the proposed action and the reasons
              therefore.

       16.4.5 The transferring of surplus teachers because of enrollment decline, school closure,
              or change in school program will be recommended by the principal and the
              appropriate School Accountability Services administrator and will be effected
              only after approval by the Superintendent.

16.5   Procedures for Placement of Surplus Teachers

       16.5.1 Written notice of surplus status will be given, when possible, by April 1 for
              elementary teachers and by April 20 for secondary teachers.

       16.5.2 Surplus teachers, who qualify for available positions, shall be placed before any
              applicants new to Granite School District are considered.




                                                27
       16.5.3 After a surplus teacher is placed, that teacher has the opportunity to apply for any
              specific position in another school that is posted as a vacancy.

16.6   Administrative Transfer of Teachers

       16.6.1 Circumstances may sometimes require that a teacher be transferred from one
              location or assignment to another.

       16.6.2 Before recommending a teacher transfer, the principal and/or the appropriate
              School Accountability Services administrator will meet with the teacher involved
              to discuss the proposed transfer and the reasons thereof.

       16.6.3 No administrative transfer will be made arbitrarily, capriciously, or without a
              written explanation of the reason for the transfer.

       16.6.4 The criteria specified in 16.4.2 and 16.4.3 will apply to administrative transfers
              during the school year because of enrollment decline, school closure, or change in
              school program.

       16.6.5 If the teacher objects to the proposed transfer, the teacher may request a meeting
              with the appropriate School Accountability Services administrator to discuss the
              matter.

       16.6.6 Administrative transfers will be recommended by the principal and/or the
              appropriate School Accountability Services administrator, and will take effect
              only after approval by the appropriate Assistant Superintendent.

16.7   Promotions

       16.7.1 In filling promotional vacancies, preference shall be given to personnel already
              employed in the District providing other qualifications are substantially equal.

       16.7.2 Applicants for such promotions shall be notified of the final decision in writing.


                                          ARTICLE 17

                            ADULT AND COMMUNITY SCHOOL
                                    EMPLOYMENT

17.1   No certificated position for credit classes in the Adult and Community Schools shall be
       filled by a teacher not employed by the District during the regular school term if there is a
       qualified applicant for such position who is employed by the District during the regular
       term.




                                                28
17.2   In filling such positions, consideration will be given to a teacher's area of competence,
       major and minor fields of study, quality of performance, and ability to relate well with
       students.

17.3   Teachers employed in adult and community school credit classes shall be paid an hourly
       rate, according to their current contract salary as a regular teacher in the District, to a
       maximum hourly rate based on step four of the teacher's salary lane.


                                          ARTICLE 18

                                    LEAVES OF ABSENCE

Note: Effective 1/1/93, the majority of currently employed teachers will convert to a new
      accumulative sick leave program, which includes both short and long-term disability. All
      teachers hired after 1/1/93 will be placed on the new sick leave program. With the
      exception of l8.1.2.1, all of the following provisions shall apply as far as there is
      available accumulated sick leave for the teacher to use. Further details of this new
      program are available from the Association or Human Resources Office.

18.1   Sick Leave. Sick leave is to be taken only for illness, accident, or recuperation from the
       same. It is the professional responsibility of every professional person to use this sick
       leave only for the purpose intended. Any proven misuse thereof would be considered
       unethical, unprofessional, and in violation of the teacher's contract. Sick leave will be
       granted according to the following schedule.

       18.1.1 Sick Leave for Provisional Teachers

              18.1.1.1        Ten days of sick leave will be granted annually with full pay,
                              cumulative to thirty teaching days.

              18.1.1.2        When the effective date of appointment of a teacher is before the
                              beginning of the second semester of any school year, he or she will
                              be given credit for the full annual sick leave allowance.

              18.1.1.3        When the effective date of appointment of a teacher is on or after
                              the beginning of the second semester, the teacher will be given
                              credit for five days’ sick leave allowance.

              18.1.1.4        One additional day of annual sick leave will be added for each
                              additional contract month served beyond the regular school year.

              18.1.1.5        Verification of any disability may be required any time a teacher is
                              absent from work. If disability verification has not been required
                              sooner, the teacher shall furnish such verification, on or before the
                              twenty-first calendar day of disability, using the District's



                                                29
                      "Diagnosis and Functional Limitations" form. The form must be
                      submitted to the District Human Resources office.

       18.1.1.6       A teacher whose personal illness extends beyond his or her
                      accumulated sick leave may be granted a leave of absence of up to
                      one year without pay or increment. Request for such leave must be
                      accompanied by a statement from a regularly licensed medical
                      doctor and/or licensed osteopathic physician that such leave is
                      necessary.

       18.1.1.7       Upon return from such leave, a teacher will be assigned to the
                      same position if available, or, if not, to a substantially similar
                      position.

18.1.2 Sick Leave for Regular Contract Teachers

Note: 18.1.2.1 Only applies to teachers on contract with the District prior to 1/1/93 who
      elected to remain on the old sick leave program. Those teachers do not have an
      accumulated sick leave program or short or long-term disability insurance
      through the District.

       18.1.2.1       Extended sick leave with full pay up to a maximum of 180 school
                      days for any one illness, not limited to any one contract year, will
                      be granted teachers.

       18.1.2.2       The provisions of 18.1.1.5, 18.1.1.6, and 18.1.1.7 above shall
                      apply.

18.1.3 Special Use of Sick Leave.

       18.1.3.1       Special use of sick leave will be granted by the principal, with
                      review by the appropriate Assistant Superintendent, in the event of
                      serious illness of a member of the immediate family, or of any
                      other person who is a member of the same household as the
                      teacher.

       18.1.3.2       The immediate family is defined as husband, wife, father, father-
                      in-law, mother, mother-in-law, daughter, daughter-in-law, son,
                      son-in-law, brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law,
                      grandchildren, grandparents, or any other person who is a
                      permanent member of the same household as the employee.

       18.1.3.3       It is not the intent that sick leave granted under this provision be
                      used for extended convalescent care.




                                        30
              18.1.3.4       Verification may be required for any family illness for which
                             special use of sick leave is requested. After three days of absence
                             for family illness in any one school year, the teacher shall furnish
                             verification of any family illness for which special use of sick
                             leave is requested.

              18.1.3.5       After ten days of absence for family illness in any one school year,
                             the teacher involved shall pay the cost of substitutes for any further
                             use of special sick leave that is granted for family illness. (The
                             teacher shall be charged the current daily Substitute II rate.)

              18.1.3.6       Up to three (3) days of special use of sick leave will be granted by
                             the principal in the event of a death in the immediate family as
                             defined above.

18.2   Personal Leave

       18.2.1 Teachers are allocated four personal leave days each contract year. Personal
              leave can be taken for any reason, at the discretion of the teacher. Teachers who
              take no personal leave in a contract year will receive an amount equal to three
              times the current Substitute II rate. Teachers who take one personal leave day in a
              contract year will receive an amount equal to two times the current Substitute II
              rate. Teachers who take two personal leave days in a contract year will receive an
              amount equal to the current Substitute II rate. Teachers who take three personal
              leave days in a contract year will receive no additional amount. Teachers who use
              all four personal leave days in a contract year will be charged the current
              Substitute II rate for the fourth day.

       18.2.2 A minimum of one day notice (24 hours) must be given to the principal before
              taking personal leave, except in cases of emergency. (See Appendix G.)

       18.2.3 Personal Leave should not be taken the day before or after a school holiday
              (weekdays when school is not in session for students) or during the first or last
              week of school. Exceptions must have the prior approval of the school principal.

       18.2.4 Limitations will be placed by the principal on the number who can take Personal
              Leave on any given day at that school. Generally only one or two Personal Leave
              days per school, per school day can be approved; such limits are necessary based
              on the availability of substitutes. Personal Leave will not be granted in connection
              with any form of job action or work stoppage.

18.3   Sabbatical Leave

       18.3.1 Sabbatical leaves of absence are granted for professional improvement upon
              recommendation by the Superintendent and the approval of the Board, subject to
              the following conditions:



                                               31
       18.3.1.1        Requests for sabbatical leaves of absence must be received by the
                       Superintendent in writing in such form as may be required by him
                       not later than February 15 of the year in which the sabbatical is
                       requested.
       18.3.1.2        Teachers will be notified by March 15 as to the disposition of the
                       request.

18.3.2 The teacher must have completed six consecutive full school years in active
       service as a regularly employed staff member in the District in order to be eligible
       to request a sabbatical leave.

18.3.3 Teachers on sabbatical leaves of absence will be paid at one-half of their annual
       salary rate. Upon return, the teacher shall be placed on the next step on the salary
       schedule.

       18.3.3.1        Payments will be made on the basis of one-twelfth of the
                       remuneration amount each month for a twelve-month period. The
                       first payment will be made at the end of the first month of effective
                       sabbatical leave.

18.3.4 A sabbatical leave of absence may be extended as a leave of absence without pay
       or increment for an additional year.

18.3.5 The teacher shall sign a written agreement with the Board agreeing to return to
       employment with the District for two full years following the leave, or to
       reimburse the District for the total amount received during the leave unless
       circumstances merit that the Board make an adjustment.

18.3.6 The teacher returning from a sabbatical leave of absence for professional
       improvement shall submit to the Superintendent a report containing transcripts of
       all college and university study while on leave, a description of travel, and other
       items of information pertinent to an evaluation of the teacher's program.

18.3.7 The medical, surgical, hospitalization, and life insurance program will be
       provided for teachers on sabbatical leave.

18.3.8 The medical surgical, hospitalization, and life insurance program will not be
       provided for teachers whose sabbatical leave has been extended, without pay,
       beyond the one-year leave.

18.3.9 The number of teachers to be granted a sabbatical leave during a school year shall
       not exceed one-half of one percent of the total certificated staff.

18.3.10Teachers returning from a sabbatical leave will be entitled at the end of the leave
       to the position they left, or to a position comparable to the one vacated. The



                                         32
              teacher hired as a replacement shall be notified in writing at the time of
              appointment that the appointment is for the length of the regular teacher's leave
              only.

18.4   Leaves of Absence Without Pay.

       18.4.1 Teachers in the District are eligible to apply for a leave of absence without pay.

       18.4.2 Leaves of absence without pay shall be granted for reasons of newborn care or
              adoption.

       18.4.3 A limited number of leaves of absence without pay for other reasons (including
              but not limited to health problems and graduate work at a university) may also be
              granted by the Superintendent after consultation with the principal and with
              approval of the Board.

       18.4.4 Teachers shall submit a written request stating the purpose of the leave, the length
              of the leave, and the beginning and termination dates.

       18.4.5 Leaves of absence without pay may not exceed two full semesters or three full
              trimesters, subject to the provisions of section 18.4.7.

       18.4.6 Teachers returning from a leave of absence without pay will be entitled at the end
              of the leave to the position they left, or to a position comparable to the one
              vacated. The teacher hired as a replacement shall be notified in writing at the time
              of appointment that the appointment is for the length of the regular teacher's leave
              only.

       18.4.7 To facilitate staffing and assignments, teachers returning from a leave of absence
              without pay are entitled to return to work at the beginning of the semester (for
              secondary) or trimester (for elementary) which most closely follows the
              anniversary of the beginning of the leave. Teachers scheduled to return at the
              beginning of the first semester (secondary) or first or second trimester
              (elementary) must notify the Human Resources office, in writing, of their intent to
              return no later than March 1. Teachers scheduled to return at the beginning of the
              second semester (secondary) or third trimester (elementary) must notify the
              Human Resources office of their intent to return in writing no later than
              November 15.

       18.4.8 Upon returning from a leave of absence without pay, the teacher will resume
              contract status as a contract teacher.

18.5   Military Leave, Jury Duty Leave, and Public Office Leave. All contract teachers will
       be eligible for Military Leave, Jury Duty Leave, and Public Office Leave as specified in
       Board Policy.




                                               33
18.6   Association Leave.

       18.6.1 The Association will be allowed up to 120 days of Association Leave for teachers
              to be released from normal duties at the request of the Association for the
              purposes of performing those duties associated with representation of the
              bargaining unit and promoting educational benefits for students, teachers,
              administrators, Granite Education Association, and the Granite School District
              Board of Education.

       18.6.2 All released time for duties associated with GEA, UEA, and NEA shall be
              considered Association Leave, except as specifically provided in the following
              paragraph.

       18.6.3 Released time for the following, when scheduled during working hours, shall be
              provided without loss of pay, and shall not be considered Association Leave:

                      ·Negotiations meetings with district representatives.
                      ·Grievance meetings with district representatives.
                      ·Other joint meetings with district representatives.

       18.6.4 Up to 60 of the 120 days of Association Leave may be recognized by the District
              as having direct benefit to the students and instructional programs of Granite
              School District. Such leave days shall be provided without loss of pay and without
              Association payment for substitutes. The Association will pay the substitute costs
              for all other Association Leave days and the District will allow the employee to be
              released without loss of pay.

       18.6.5 Requests for Association Leave, and a summary statement relative to the outcome
              of the leave (benefit to Granite School District and/or the Association), must be
              submitted by the executive director of the Association in writing, on District
              approved forms, to the Superintendent or designee. The executive director of the
              Association will determine whether the leave requires the payment of substitute
              costs. An evaluation of all Association Leave days relative to the purpose and
              outcome of such leaves will be conducted by the Association and District
              administration prior to July 15 of each year.

18.7   Adoption Leave. Employees who legally adopt a child who has not previously been a
       member of the immediate household may take up to ten days of accumulated sick leave.
       The adopted child must be under the age of 18. Any leave to be considered adoption
       leave must be taken within 30 calendar days of the day on which the child is placed in the
       home of the adopting parent(s).




                                               34
                                          ARTICLE 19

         SUSPENSION, TERMINATION AND NON-RENEWAL OF CONTRACT

19.1   Teachers may be suspended or dismissed for cause under the provisions of the Orderly
       School Termination Procedures Act, Title 53A, Chapter 8, Utah Code Annotated. (See
       Appendix G.)

19.2   Cause. A list of causes considered by the Board to be possible grounds for suspension or
       dismissal is included in the official Policies, Rules, and Regulations of the Board.

19.3   Suspension. The Superintendent, or the Superintendent’s designee, may suspend a
       teacher with or without salary, whenever, in the Superintendent’s professional judgment,
       it is in the best interest of the District to take such action. Notice of suspension shall be
       given in writing, including a statement of the reasons thereof. Suspended teachers shall
       have the right to an informal hearing pursuant to Article 6.4 if the hearing is requested
       within ten working days of receiving a letter of suspension.

19.4   Termination of Contract during Contract Term.

       19.4.1 Preliminary Notice: When the District intends to terminate a teacher's contract
              during the contract term for reasons of incompetence, the District will inform the
              teacher of the fact that continued employment is in question and of the reasons
              thereof at least thirty days before issuing the termination notice. The teacher will
              be given an opportunity to correct any deficiencies that precipitated possible
              termination of contract.

       19.4.2 Termination Notice: When the District intends to terminate a teacher's contract
              during the contract term for incompetence, or for any other cause, the District will
              give prior written notice of such intent served by personal delivery or by certified
              mail addressed to the teacher's last known address. Such termination notice will
              state the date of termination and the reasons and causes for termination, and will
              advise the teacher that he or she may request an informal conference with the
              appropriate Assistant Superintendent to discuss the matter. Termination notices
              will be delivered or mailed at least thirty days prior to the proposed date of
              termination.

19.5   Nonrenewal of Regular Contract Teachers.

       19.5.1 Preliminary Notice: When the District intends not to renew a teacher's contract,
              the District will inform the teacher of the fact that continued employment is in
              question and of the reasons thereof at least one month before issuing the
              nonrenewal notice. The teacher will be given an opportunity to correct any
              deficiencies which precipitated possible nonrenewal.



                                                35
       19.5.2 Nonrenewal Notice: When the District intends not to renew a teacher's contract,
              the District will give prior written notice of such intent served by personal
              delivery or by certified mail addressed to the teacher's last known address. Such
              nonrenewal notice will be dated and contain a clear and concise statement that the
              teacher's contract will not be renewed, will state the reasons and causes for such
              action, and will advise the teacher that he or she may request an informal
              conference with the appropriate School Accountability Services administrator to
              discuss the matter. Nonrenewal notices will be delivered or mailed at least two
              months prior to the end of the contract term of the individual teacher involved.

       19.5.3 Failure to Give Timely Notice: In the absence of timely notice, contract teachers
              will be deemed to be re-employed for the succeeding contract term with a salary
              based upon the applicable teacher salary schedule.

19.6   Informal Hearing for Provisional Contract Teachers

       19.6.1 After receiving a nonrenewal notice, provisional contract teachers may file a
              written request in the division Assistant Superintendent's office for an informal
              hearing pursuant to Article 6.4 to review the proposed dismissal. If the teacher
              does not request an informal hearing within 15 calendar days after receiving the
              termination or nonrenewal notice, his or her employment shall end on the date
              specified in the notice.

       19.6.2 If the division Assistant Superintendent's written determination is to dismiss the
              teacher, it will specify the effective date of dismissal, which will in no event be
              sooner than the originally proposed date, or the tenth day following the date of
              determination, whichever is later. The decision of the division Assistant
              Superintendent will be binding upon all parties, provided the decision does not
              exceed district authority as established in the law.

              Note: Provisional contract teachers have the same right of a hearing under 19.7 as
              a regular contract teacher for a termination of a contract for cause during the
              contract term.

19.7   Formal Hearing for Regular Contract Teachers

       19.7.1 After receiving a termination notice, or a nonrenewal notice, regular contract
              teachers and specially funded program teachers who have completed their
              provisional period and who are being released for reasons other than curtailment
              or discontinuance of funds, may file a written request in the Superintendent’s
              office for a formal hearing to review the proposed dismissal. If the teacher does
              not request a formal hearing within 15 calendar days after receiving the
              termination or nonrenewal notice, his or her employment shall end on the date
              specified in the notice.




                                                36
       19.7.2 Representatives of the Superintendent and the Association will agree upon an
              impartial third party hearing examiner from outside the District within ten
              calendar days after receipt of the formal hearing request.

       19.7.3 At the hearing, the parties shall have the right to be accompanied, advised or
              represented by a person of their own choosing except that they may not be
              represented by a representative, an officer, or a member of any teacher
              organization other than the Association. All parties may be represented by
              counsel, produce witnesses, hear all testimony of the other party, cross-examine
              witnesses, and examine all documentary evidence.

       19.7.4 Within ten calendar days following the hearing, the hearing examiner will submit
              his or her recommended solution to the Board, with copies to the teacher, the
              Superintendent, the principal, and to the Association. The recommendation of the
              hearing examiner will be advisory only. The Board will make a final disposition
              of the case within thirty calendar days after receiving the hearing examiner's
              recommendation. The decision of the Board will be submitted in writing to all
              parties, and will be binding upon all parties, provided the decision does not
              exceed Board authority as established in the law.

19.8   General Provisions

       19.8.1 Time Limits: The above time limits regarding hearing dates and decisions may
              be extended by mutual agreement.

       19.8.2 Costs: The costs of the hearing examiner and of preparing a hearing record (if
              any) will be shared equally by the Board and the Association.

       19.8.3 Reinstatement of Lost Pay: If it is determined that a suspension without pay, or
              the length thereof was unjustified, the final decision will include appropriate
              reinstatement of lost pay to the teacher involved.

       19.8.4 Personnel Records: If the final determination is not to dismiss a teacher, record
              of the District's attempt to dismiss the teacher will not become part of the
              teacher's personnel file. Material will be removed from the teacher's file when a
              teacher's claim that it is inaccurate has been sustained in dismissal proceedings.

       19.8.5 Court Appeals: Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of a teacher
              to appeal the District's decision to an appropriate court of law.

19.9 Reduction in Force

       19.9.1 The reduction in force process will not apply and need not be followed unless
              there is a district-wide reduction in force. A district-wide reduction in force
              occurs when the District is unable to place teachers at the end of the surplus




                                               37
             process, prior to the beginning of a new contract year. After the surplus process is
             complete, the Superintendent may release as many teachers as necessary.

      19.9.2 A meeting between the Superintendent, or designee, and a representative of the
             Association will be set at least 10 days prior to any final action by the District to
             reduce teachers as the result of a district-wide reduction in force.

      19.9.3 All unplaced teachers will be reviewed by the number of their respective
             endorsements and certifications, according to the staffing needs of the District.
             Staffing needs may include but are not limited to the following: endorsements,
             certifications, pattern of declining enrollments in subject area, endorsements in
             core academic areas, ESL and gifted endorsements, extracurricular coaching
             endorsements and certifications, eMINTS certifications, and those who are fluent
             in a language needed within a school site. Any teacher who has received a current
             (within the existing school year) written notice of suspension will not be eligible
             to displace another teacher.

      19.9.4 If a choice must be made between two or more teachers determined by the
             District to be equally well qualified for the position, the teacher with the most
             advanced degree and lane placement according to the teacher salary schedule will
             be retained.

      19.9.5 Teachers released through this process, who are not on active corrective discipline
             as found within their district personnel file, shall be given the first right of
             interview for positions for which they are qualified that become available during
             the six months following their release. Notification of the available position shall
             be made by a certified letter to the last known address of the former employee.
             The offer of interview shall advise the person that he or she has seven days after
             the postmarked date of the letter to accept or reject the offer of interview. If
             rehired under this section, teachers will be placed on the step they would have
             received if they had not been released. Offers not accepted or responded to by the
             seventh day are deemed rejected.


19.10 Voluntary Termination of Employment (Resignation)

      19.10.1 The Board and a teacher may mutually agree to terminate the teacher's contract at
              any time.

      19.10.2 A teacher may retire from his or her employment on the last day of the school
             year by submitting written notice to the director of Human Resources no
              later than March 1.

      19.10.3 A teacher may terminate his or her contract upon thirty days written notice to the
             director of Human Resources.




                                               38
       19.10.4 Damages in the amount of $1,000 will be levied against a teacher who fails to
              give the above required notice.


                                          ARTICLE 20

                                  INSURANCE PROGRAMS

20.1   Eligibility. All teachers under written contract shall be eligible for the group insurance
       programs provided by the board.

       20.1.1 Coverage. Insurance coverage (medical, life, etc.) for eligible teachers cannot
              begin until the District personnel office receives completed enrollment cards for
              each insurance coverage desired. Teachers who submit the necessary insurance
              enrollment forms within their first 30 days of contract employment will be
              covered beginning 90 days from their contract hire date. (Flexible spending
              accounts and 401(k) accounts are not subject to the 90-day waiting period and,
              upon election, will commence as of the contract hire date. Voluntary life
              insurance becomes effective when approved by the carrier.) Teachers who are late
              in submitting these enrollment forms (beyond the first 30 days of contract
              employment) must provide proof of insurability, wait until the following Open
              Enrollment period, or be subject to preexisting condition limitations depending on
              the insurance plan desired. Coverage shall be continuous for contract teachers
              who are continued in employment on a year-to-year basis.

       20.1.2 Ending Date of Coverage. Each insured teacher who terminates employment
              with the District shall have the benefit of such group insurance during the summer
              period and until August 31 for the employee group to which the teacher belonged,
              provided the teacher shall have completed the employment contract for the school
              year just ended. Otherwise, coverage shall end on the date specified in the
              insurance policy for teachers who terminate prior to the end of the school year.

20.2   Dual Medical Coverage. If a teacher who is eligible for coverage under the District’s
       group medical plan is also eligible as the spouse of another covered employee, the
       coverages will supplement one another, so that benefit payments for such individuals
       with dual coverage will be made up to 100% of the eligible charge provided that each
       employee pays the full contribution amount associated with the coverage sought and one
       employee pays the employee or employee plus dependent(s) amount (e.g. two employees
       only, one pays employee plus spouse and the other pays employee only contribution; or
       two employees and family, one employee pays employee plus spouse and family and the
       other pays employee plus family). The employees must be members of the same medical
       insurance plan.

20.3   Shared Premium for Contract Teachers Working Less than Full-time (1.0 FTE).
       Contract teachers working less than full-time will receive full coverage under the
       District's group medical and non-contributory life insurance programs if they pay their



                                                39
       proportional share of premium costs by authorized payroll deduction. The teacher’s
       proportional share equals 1.0 minus the teacher’s FTE. The Board will pay the
       percentage of premiums equal to the teacher’s FTE. Such teachers who elect not to pay
       their share of the premiums will not be covered.

20.4   Insurance Committee. Association leaders and/or Association appointees will meet
       regularly with the District to discuss, study, and make recommendations regarding the
       substance, implementation, and funding of insurance programs.


                                          ARTICLE 21

                                WORKER'S COMPENSATION

21.1   The Board will provide worker's compensation insurance for teachers as required by state
       law.

                                          ARTICLE 22

                                      DUES DEDUCTION

22.1   The Board agrees to deduct from each teacher's salary, as authorized by that individual,
       an amount of money to be used to pay the dues to the appropriate association.

22.2   Dues deductions shall be made uniformly on each monthly payroll. Any requests to add,
       delete or change dues deductions, which are received by the Payroll Office after the 10th
       day of any month, will not be honored until the following month. Requests to add,
       change, or cancel dues deductions must be submitted on forms provided by the
       Association and available at the Association offices.

22.3   The Association agrees to hold the Board harmless from any action growing out of these
       deductions and commenced by any teacher against the Board or the District and assumes
       full responsibility for the disposition of the funds so deducted once they have been turned
       over to the Association.


                                          ARTICLE 23

                             DISTRICT RETIREMENT BENEFIT

23.1   Teachers who retire under the provisions of the Utah School Employees Retirement Act
       shall be eligible for the following additional district retirement benefits unless dismissed
       for cause:




                                                40
       23.1.1 Retiring teachers who are eligible for full early retirement benefits shall receive
              up to 60% of the amount of the retiring teacher’s final full-time contract salary.
              (See Administrative Memo 56.)

       23.1.2 One half of one percent (.005 ) times the final base salary (current teacher’s
              salary) times the number of years of service (full credit for teaching or
              administrative work as defined in the current teacher’s salary schedule plus one
              half year’s credit for a full year of teaching or administrative work in other Utah
              school districts only).

       23.1.3 The District will establish a 403(b) program for the deposit of district sponsored
              early retirement monies for eligible teachers.


                                          ARTICLE 24

                    SCHOOL BUILDING PROFESSIONAL COMMITTEE

24.1   For encouragement of an acceptable relationship among the faculty and to assist in the
       efficient operation of the school, during the first month of the school year a committee of
       teachers shall be formed in each school building from the faculty of that building. The
       committee is an advisory, problem-solving body. Therefore, the principal and
       Association faculty representative of each building shall be charged with the
       responsibility of organizing the School Building Professional Committee. All teachers
       within the school shall be eligible to vote for and hold elective positions on the
       committee, irrespective of membership in the Association. The members of the School
       Building Professional Committee shall select one member who will serve as the
       chairperson of the committee. Prior to the implementation of new policy initiated at the
       local school building level, the policy will be reviewed by the school building committee
       in consultation with the faculty. Even though administrative functions are the
       responsibility of the Board and its administrative staff, all due consideration should be
       given to the committee recommendation.

       24.1.1 In schools having fewer than 30 teachers, the committee shall consist of three
              teachers: one member shall be elected by the faculty, one member shall be
              appointed by the principal, and one shall be the duly elected faculty
              representative.

       24.1.2 In schools having 30 teachers or more, the committee shall consist of five
              teachers; two members shall be elected by the faculty, two shall be appointed by
              the principal, and one shall be the duly elected faculty representative.

24.2   The chairperson of the School Building Professional Committee shall call and conduct all
       meetings of said committee. The committee shall meet at least once a month.




                                                41
24.3   The principal of each school shall meet as often as necessary with the School Building
       Professional Committee. However, it shall not be mandatory that the principal be in
       attendance at all meetings of said committee.

24.4   Additional meetings may be called at the request of the principal or the chairperson of the
       School Building Professional Committee.



                                          ARTICLE 25

                         PROFESSIONAL PLANNING COMMITTEE

25.1   The Professional Planning Committee shall be composed of the following:

       · Members appointed by the Association (up to 10 appointees).
       · Members appointed by the Superintendent (up to 10 appointees).

25.2   The committee shall function as an informal discussion group on matters of mutual
       concern to the teachers and the Board. Its purpose is to gather ideas, present reactions,
       express opinions, make recommendations, and to discuss school policy.

25.3   Meetings shall be held quarterly or a minimum of three (3) times during the school year
       according to a schedule determined by the committee.




                                          ARTICLE 26

                          DISTRICT CURRICULUM COMMITTEES

26.1   Teachers, patrons, and administrators must be involved in curriculum initiatives,
       processes that address or evaluate curriculum issues, and district-wide adoptions of
       curriculum programs or textbooks.

26.2   Under the direction of the Teaching and Learning Services, all task forces, committees,
       and boards convened to address curriculum matters shall have representation of teachers,
       patrons, and administrators among their memberships.

26.3   The District will confer with the Association regarding membership in all task forces and
       committees that are formed to address curriculum matters.




                                                42
                                         ARTICLE 27

                             CLASS SIZE REVIEW COMMITTEE

27.1   There shall be two class size review committees:

       -an elementary committee
       -a secondary committee

27.2   Each committee shall be composed of the following:

       Elementary: five members appointed by the Association which shall include at least one
       year-round teacher.

       Secondary: five members appointed by the Association which shall include at least one
       junior high teacher and counselor and one senior high teacher and counselor.

       Five members appointed by the Superintendent or the Superintendent’s designee to each
       committee.

27.3   The committees shall meet as needed to review, study, and make recommendations
       concerning class size issues.

27.4   The Association shall be given regular class size reports, according to the District
       schedule, detailing each school.


                                         ARTICLE 28

                          RELEASED TIME FOR GEA PRESIDENT

28.1   The GEA President will be released from teaching duties half-time to perform duties as
       GEA President.

28.2   The District will pay the full salary and fringe benefits of the Association president.
       The GEA will reimburse the District an amount equal to 50% of the president’s salary
       and benefits, less the 10 days allowed by statute.

28.3   The president shall receive normal step advancements on the salary schedule during his
       or her tenure as president.

28.4   The teacher returning from tenure as President will be entitled to the position the teacher
       left, or to a comparable position.




                                                43
                                          ARTICLE 29

                                   LISTING OF TEACHERS

29.1   On or before August 15 of each year, the Human Resources Office will provide the
       Association with a listing of all new bargaining unit employees who have at that point
       been hired for the new year. The listing will show the name, address, and assigned
       location of each employee.

29.2   On or before September 15 of each year, the Human Resources Office will provide the
       Association with a listing of all bargaining unit employees currently on the computer file.
       The listing will show the name, address, and assigned location of each employee.



                                          ARTICLE 30

                                  BULLETIN BOARD SPACE

The Association shall have the right to post notices of Association matters on a bulletin board
space no smaller that twelve (12) square feet established for the Association's exclusive use in
each school.

                                          ARTICLE 31

                        DURATION AND EFFECT OF AGREEMENT

31.1   The specific provisions of this Agreement, and of other negotiated items, shall supersede
       any policy or directive of the Board which contradicts any such provision of this
       Agreement.

31.2   The provisions of this Agreement may be changed only through the written mutual
       consent of the Board and the Association.

31.3   All terms and conditions of employment not covered by this Agreement or by other
       negotiated items shall continue to be subject to the Board's direction and control.

31.4   This Agreement shall be effective July 1, 2011, and shall continue in effect through June
       30, 2014, except as provided in the following paragraph.

31.5   Negotiations shall commence April 1, 2012, April 1, 2013, and April 1, 2014 for the
       purpose of seeking mutually acceptable contract adjustments on the following items only:

       ·Salary
       ·Medical Insurance
       ·Any other negotiable items with mutual consent of both parties



                                                44
                           Appendices

The following appendices are included as reference materials only.




                               45
                                                               Granite School District
                                                           2011-12 Teacher Salary Schedule
                                                         Nine-Month Base Contract (183 Days)

                      LANE A             LANE B               LANE C             LANE D             LANE E             LANE F             LANE G
                                       Bachelor's           Bachelor's                             Master's           Master's
                      Bachelor's       Degree + 20          Degree + 40          Master's         Degree + 20        Degree + 40
     Steps             Degree           Sem Hrs              Sem Hrs             Degree            Sem Hrs            Sem Hrs            Doctorate
        1          $31,120 + $1,884   $32,735 + $1,346     $34,620 + $1,346   $35,158 + $1,346   $36,504 + $1,346   $37,850 + $1,346   $39,196 + $1,346
        2              32,197 + 807      33,274 + 807         35,158 + 808       35,696 + 808       37,042 + 808       38,388 + 808       39,734 + 808
        3                    33,004            34,081               35,966             36,504             37,850             39,196             40,542




                                                                                                                                                          APPENDIX A Salary Schedule
        4                    34,081            35,158               37,042             37,581             38,927             40,273             41,619
        5                    35,696            36,773               38,658             39,196             40,542             41,888             43,234
        6                    37,312            38,388               40,273             40,811             42,157             43,503             44,849
        7                    38,927            40,004               41,888             42,426             43,772             45,118             46,464
        8                    40,542            41,619               43,503             44,042             45,388             46,734             48,080
        9                    42,157            43,234               45,118             45,657             47,003             48,352             49,745
       10                    43,772            44,849               46,734             47,272             48,631             50,025             51,418
       11                    45,388            46,464               48,352             48,909             50,303             51,697             53,090
       12                    47,003            48,080               50,025             50,582             51,975             53,369             54,764
       13                                      49,747               51,697             52,255             53,648             55,042             56,436
       14                                                           53,369             53,927             55,321             56,714             58,109
       15                                                                              55,599             56,993             58,388             59,781
       16                                                                                                 58,665             60,060             61,453
       17                                                                                                                    61,732             63,126
       18
       19
       20                    48,632            51,419               55,043             57,272             60,337             63,405             64,799


20 semester hours = 30 quarter hours
The 2011-12 schedule includes a legislative salary adjustment of $4,200 on all steps.
Teachers at Title I schools receive an extra $600 annual Title I stipend.           46
      APPENDIX B Grievance Form




   Please contact the
GEA office for these forms.




                 47
        APPENDIX C Application for Lane Advancement




Lane Change applications are available in
the Human Resources office. Please bring
  official transcripts and your OnTrack
             transcript with you.




                            48
        APPENDIX D Special Employment Contract




The Special Employment Contract is
  sent out only to those teachers it
             applies to.




                          49
                                    APPENDIX E

                                  UTAH CODE 53A

                                    CHAPTER 10

                            EDUCATOR EVALUATION

53A-10-101. Legislative findings.
(1)   The Legislature recognizes that the quality of public education can be improved
      and enhanced by systematic, fair, and competent annual evaluation of public
      educators and remediation of those whose performance is inadequate.
(2)   In accordance with Subsections 53A-1a-104(7) and 53A-6-102(2)(a) and (b), the
      desired purposes of evaluation are to:
      (a)    allow the educator and the school district to promote the professional
             growth of the educator; and
      (b)    identify and encourage quality instruction in order to improve student
             achievement.

53A-10-102. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
(1)    "Career educator" means a licensed employee who has a reasonable expectation
       of continued employment under the policies of a local school board.
(2)    "Educator" means an individual employed by a school district who is required to
       hold a professional license issued by the State Board of Education, except:
       (a)     a superintendent; or
       (b)     an individual who:
               (i)     works fewer than three hours per day; or
               (ii)    is hired for less than half of a school year.
(3)    "Probationary educator" means an educator employed by a school district who,
       under local school board policy, has been advised by the district that the
       educator's performance is inadequate.
(4)    "Provisional educator" means an educator employed by a school district who has
       not achieved status as a career educator within the school district.

53A-10-103. Establishment of educator evaluation program -- Joint committee.
(1)   A local school board shall develop an educator evaluation program in consultation
      with its joint committee.
(2)   The joint committee described in Subsection (1) shall consist of an equal number
      of classroom teachers, parents, and administrators appointed by the local school
      board.
(3)   A local school board may appoint members of the joint committee from a list of
      nominees:
      (a)     voted on by classroom teachers in a nomination election;
      (b)     voted on by the administrators in a nomination election; and
      (c)     of parents submitted by school community councils within the district.



                                      50
(4)    The evaluation program developed by the joint committee must comply with the
       requirements of this chapter.

53A-10-105. Evaluation orientation.
(1)   The principal of each school shall orient all educators assigned to the school
      concerning the school board's educator evaluation program, including the purpose
      of the evaluations and the method used to evaluate.
(2)   Evaluations may not occur prior to the orientation by the principal.


53A-10-106. Components of educator evaluation program.
An educator evaluation program adopted by a local school board in consultation with a
joint committee established in Section 53A-10-103 shall include the following
components:
(1)     a reliable and valid evaluation program consistent with generally accepted
        professional standards for personnel evaluation systems;
(2)     (a)      the evaluation of provisional and probationary educators at least twice
        each school year;
                 and
        (b)      the annual evaluation of all career educators;
(3)     systematic evaluation procedures for both provisional and career educators;
(4)     the use of multiple lines of evidence, such as:
        (a)      self-evaluation;
        (b)      student and parent input;
        (c)      peer observation;
        (d)      supervisor observations;
        (e)      evidence of professional growth;
        (f)      student achievement data; and
        (g)      other indicators of instructional improvement;
(5)     a reasonable number of observation periods for an evaluation to insure adequate
        reliability;
(6)     administration of an educator's evaluation by:
        (a)      the principal;
        (b)      the principal's designee;
        (c)      the educator's immediate supervisor; or
        (d)      another person specified in the evaluation program; and
(7)     an orientation for educators on the educator evaluation program.


53A-10-106.5. Summative evaluation timelines -- Review of summative evaluations.
(1)   The person responsible for administering an educator's summative evaluation
      shall:
      (a)    at least 15 days before an educator's first evaluation:
             (i)      notify the educator of the evaluation process; and
             (ii)     give the educator a copy of the evaluation instrument, if an
                      instrument is used;



                                        51
       (b)     (i)     allow the educator to make a written response to any part of the
                       evaluation; and
               (ii)    attach the educator's response to the evaluation;
       (c)     within 15 days after the evaluation process is completed, discuss the
               written evaluation with the educator; and
       (d)     following any revision of the written evaluation made after the discussion:
               (i)     file the evaluation and any related reports or documents in the
                       educator's personnel file; and
               (ii)    give a copy of the written evaluation and attachments to the
                       educator.
(2)    An educator who is not satisfied with a summative evaluation may request a
       review of the evaluation within 15 days after receiving the written evaluation.
(3)    If a review is requested, the school district superintendent or the superintendent's
       designee shall appoint a person not employed by the school district who has
       expertise in teacher or personnel evaluation to review and make recommendations
       to the superintendent regarding the teacher's summative evaluation.



53A-10-107. Deficiencies -- Improvement.
(1)   The person responsible for administering an educator's evaluation shall give an
      educator whose performance is inadequate or in need of improvement a written
      document clearly identifying:
      (a)    deficiencies;
      (b)    the available resources for improvement; and
      (c)    a recommended course of action that will improve the educator's
             performance.
(2)   An educator is responsible for improving performance, including using any
      resources identified by the school district, and demonstrating acceptable levels of
      improvement in the designated areas of deficiencies.
(3)   (a)    The person responsible for administering the evaluation of an educator
             whose performance has been determined to be inadequate or in need of
             improvement shall complete written evaluations and recommendations
             regarding the educator at least 30 days before the end of the educator's
             contract school year.
      (b)    The final evaluation shall include only data previously considered and
             discussed with the educator as required by Section 53A-10-106.5.

53A-10-108. Mentor for provisional educator.
(1)   In accordance with Subsections 53A-1a-104(7) and 53A-6-102(2)(a) and (b), the
      principal or immediate supervisor of a provisional educator shall assign a person
      who has received training or will receive training in mentoring educators as a
      mentor to the provisional educator.
(2)   Where possible, the mentor shall be a career educator who performs substantially
      the same duties as the provisional educator and has at least three years of
      educational experience.



                                        52
(3)   The mentor shall assist the provisional educator to become effective and
      competent in the teaching profession and school system, but may not serve as an
      evaluator of the provisional educator.
(4)   An educator who is assigned as a mentor may receive compensation for those
      services in addition to the educator's regular salary.




                                     53
                                   APPENDIX F Teacher Application for Personal Leave


                               Teacher Application For



                               Personal Leave
                                   Original Copy to Principal/Supervisor only.
                                   DO NOT send copies to Payroll or Human Resources.

Name of Employee:                  ________                 SSN/Employee ID#:


School/Department:

Proposed Date(s) of Leave:

Teachers are allocated four personal leave days each contract year. Personal leave can be taken for any
reason, at the discretion of the teacher. Teachers who take no personal leave in a contract year will
receive an amount equal to three times the current Substitute II rate. Teachers who take one personal
leave day in a contract year will receive an amount equal to two times the current Substitute II rate.
Teachers who take two personal leave days in a contract year will receive an amount equal to the current
Substitute II rate. Teachers who take three personal leave days in a contract year will receive no
additional amount. Teachers who use all four personal leave days in a contract year will be charged the
current Substitute II rate for the fourth day.

A minimum of one day notice (24 hours) must be given to the principal before taking personal leave,
except in cases of emergency.

Personal Leave should not be taken the day before or after a school holiday (weekdays when school is
not in session for students) or during the first or last week of school. Exceptions must have the prior
approval of the school principal.

Limitations will be placed by the principal on the number who can take Personal Leave on any given day
at that school. Generally only one or two Personal Leave days per school, per school day can be
approved; such limits are necessary based on the availability of substitutes. Personal Leave will not be
granted in connection with any form of job action or work stoppage


NOTE:           This negotiated benefit is to be used at the discretion of the teacher; however, personal
                leave should not be used in order to work another job at public expense.


Employee’s Signature                                                      Date


Principal/Supervisor’s Signature                                          Date
                                                                                              Revised 7/14/2011




                                                    54
                                      APPENDIX G

                                   UTAH CODE 53A

                                      CHAPTER 8

                     SCHOOL TERMINATION PROCEDURES

53A-8-101. Short title.
This chapter is known as the "Utah Orderly School Termination Procedures Act."

53A-8-102. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
(1)    "Career employee" means an employee of a school district who has obtained a
       reasonable expectation of continued employment based upon Section 53A-8-106
       and an agreement with the employee or the employee's association, district
       practice, or policy.
(2)    "Contract term" or "term of employment" means the period of time during which
       an employee is engaged by the school district under a contract of employment,
       whether oral or written.
(3)    "Dismissal" or "termination" means:
       (a)     termination of the status of employment of an employee;
       (b)     failure to renew or continue the employment contract of a career employee
               beyond the then-current school year;
       (c)     reduction in salary of an employee not generally applied to all employees
               of the same category employed by the school district during the
               employee's contract term; or
       (d)     change of assignment of an employee with an accompanying reduction in
               pay, unless the assignment change and salary reduction are agreed to in
               writing.
(4)    "Employee" means a career or provisional employee of a school district, but does
       not include:
       (a)     the district superintendent, or the equivalent at the Schools for the Deaf
               and the Blind;
       (b)     the district business administrator or the equivalent at the Schools for the
               Deaf and the Blind; or
       (c)     a temporary employee.
(5)     "Last-hired, first-fired layoff policy" means a staff reduction policy that mandates
       the termination of an employee who started to work for the district most recently
       before terminating a more senior employee.
(6)    "Provisional employee" means an individual, other than a career employee or a
       temporary employee, who is employed by a school district.
(7)    "School board" or "board" means a district school board or its equivalent at the
       Schools for the Deaf and the Blind.
(8)    "School district" or "district" means:
       (a)     a public school district; or



                                        55
       (b)     the Schools for the Deaf and the Blind.
(9)    "Temporary employee" means an individual who is employed on a temporary
       basis as defined by policies adopted by the local board of education. If the class
       of employees in question is represented by an employee organization recognized
       by the local board, the board shall adopt its policies based upon an agreement
       with that organization. Temporary employees serve at will and have no
       expectation of continued employment.

53A-8-103. Local school board to establish dismissal procedures.
(1)   A local school board shall, by contract with its employees or their associations, or
      by resolution of the board, establish procedures for dismissal of employees in an
      orderly manner without discrimination.
(2)   The procedures shall include standards of due process and causes for dismissal.


53A-8-104. Dismissal procedures.
(1)   A district shall provide employees with a written statement specifying:
      (a)     the causes under which a career employee's contract may not be renewed
              or continued beyond the current school year;
      (b)     the causes under which a career or provisional employee's contract may be
              terminated during the contract term; and
      (c)     the orderly dismissal procedures that are used by the district in cases of
              contract termination, discontinuance, or nonrenewal.
(2)   If the district intends to terminate a career employee's contract during its term for
      reasons of unsatisfactory performance or discontinue a career employee's contract
      beyond the current school year for reasons of unsatisfactory performance, the
      unsatisfactory performance must be documented in at least two evaluations
      conducted at any time within the preceding three years in accordance with district
      policies or practices.
(3)   (a)     A district shall notify a career employee, at least 30 days prior to issuing
              under Subsection
              (3)(d) notice of intent not to renew or continue the career employee's
              contract beyond the current school year, that continued employment is in
              question and the reasons for the anticipated nonrenewal or discontinuance.
      (b)     If a career employee receives a notice under Subsection (3)(a) that
              continued employment is in question, the board:
              (i)       shall give the career employee an opportunity to correct the
                        problem in accordance with the district evaluation policies; and
              (ii)      may grant the career employee assistance to correct the
                        deficiencies, including informal conferences and the services of
                        school personnel within the district.
      (c)     If a career employee does not correct the deficiencies as determined in
              accordance with the evaluation and personnel policies of the district and
              the district intends to not renew or discontinue the contract of employment
              of the career employee at the end of the current school year, it shall give
              notice of that intention to the employee.



                                        56
      (d)      The district shall issue the notice at least 30 days before the end of the
               career employee's contract term.
(4)   (a)      A district is not required to provide a cause for not offering a contract to a
               provisional employee.
      (b)      If a district intends to not offer a contract for a subsequent term of
               employment to a provisional employee, the district shall give notice of that
               intention to the employee at least 60 days before the end of the provisional
               employee's contract term.
(5)   In the absence of a notice, an employee is considered employed for the next
      contract term with a salary based upon the salary schedule applicable to the class
      of employee into which the individual falls.
(6)   If a district intends to not renew or discontinue the contract of a career employee
      or to terminate a career or provisional employee's contract during the contract
      term:
      (a)      the district shall give written notice of the intent to the employee;
      (b)      the notice shall be served by personal delivery or by certified mail
               addressed to the employee's last-known address as shown on the records
               of the district;
      (c)      except as provided under Subsection (3), the district shall give notice at
               least 30 days prior to the proposed date of termination;
      (d)      the notice shall state the date of termination and the detailed reasons for
               termination;
      (e)      the notice shall advise the employee that the employee has a right to a fair
               hearing and that the hearing is waived if it is not requested within 15 days
               after the notice of termination was either personally delivered or mailed to
               the employee's most recent address shown on the district's personnel
               records; and
      (f)      the notice shall state that failure of the employee to request a hearing in
               accordance with procedures set forth in the notice constitutes a waiver of
               that right and that the district may then proceed with termination without
               further notice.
(7)   (a)      The procedure under which a contract is terminated during its term may
               include a provision under which the active service of the employee is
               suspended pending a hearing if it appears that the continued employment
               of the individual may be harmful to students or to the district.
      (b)      Suspension pending a hearing may be without pay if an authorized
               representative of the district determines, after providing the employee
               with an opportunity for an informal conference to discuss the allegations,
               that it is more likely than not that the allegations against the employee are
               true.
      (c)      If termination is not subsequently ordered, the employee shall receive
               back pay for the period of suspension without pay.
(8)   The procedure under which an employee's contract is terminated during its term
      shall provide for a written notice of suspension or final termination including
      findings of fact upon which the action is based.




                                        57
53A-8-105. Hearings before district board or hearing officers -- Rights of the board
and the employee -- Subpoenas -- Appeals.
(1)    (a)     Hearings are held under this chapter before the board or before hearing
               officers selected by the board to conduct the hearings and make
               recommendations concerning findings.
       (b)     The board shall establish procedures to appoint hearing officers.
       (c)     The board may delegate its authority to a hearing officer to make decisions
               relating to the employment of an employee which are binding upon both
               the employee and the board.
       (d)     This Subsection (1) does not limit the right of the board or the employee to
               appeal to an appropriate court of law.
(2)    At the hearings, an employee has the right to counsel, to produce witnesses, to
       hear testimony against the employee, to cross-examine witnesses, and to examine
       documentary evidence.
(3)    Subpoenas may be issued and oaths administered as provided under Section
       53A-6-603.

53A-8-106. Career employee status for provisional employees.
(1)   (a)      A provisional employee must work for a school district on at least a
               half-time basis for three consecutive years to obtain career employee
               status.
      (b)      A school district may extend the provisional status of an employee up to
               an additional two consecutive years in accordance with a written policy
               adopted by the district's school board that specifies the circumstances
               under which an employee's provisional status may be extended.
(2)   Policies of an employing school district shall determine the status of a career
      employee in the event of the following:
      (a)      the employee accepts a position which is substantially different from the
               position in which career status was achieved; or
      (b)      the employee accepts employment in another school district.
(3)   If an employee who is under an order of probation or remediation in one
      assignment in a school district is transferred or given a new assignment in the
      district, the order shall stand until its provisions are satisfied.
(4)   An employee who is given extra duty assignments in addition to a primary
      assignment, such as a teacher who also serves as a coach or activity advisor, is a
      temporary employee in those extra duty assignments and may not acquire career
      status beyond the primary assignment.
(5)   A person is an at-will employee and is not eligible for career employee status if
      the person:
      (a)      is a teacher who holds a competency-based license pursuant to Section
               53A-6-104.5 and does not hold a level 1, 2, or 3 license as defined in
               Section 53A-6-103; or
      (b)      holds an administrative/supervisory letter of authorization pursuant to
               Section 53A-6-110.




                                        58
53A-8-107. Necessary staff reduction not precluded -- Last-hired, first-fired layoffs
             prohibited.
(1)   Nothing in this chapter prevents staff reduction if necessary to reduce the number
      of employees because of the following:
      (a)      declining student enrollments in the district;
      (b)      the discontinuance or substantial reduction of a particular service or
               program;
      (c)      the shortage of anticipated revenue after the budget has been adopted; or
      (d)      school consolidation.
(2)   A school district may not utilize a last-hired, first-fired layoff policy when
      terminating school district employees.
(3)   A school district may consider the following factors when terminating a school
      district employee:
      (a)      the results of an employee's performance evaluation; and
      (b)      a school's personnel needs.




                                       59
                                        INDEX
Item                                            Pages
Adoptions                                         34
Adult and Community School Employment             28
Agreement:
      Adoption of                                  7
      Duration and Effect                         44
Assignments                                       21
Association:
      Definition                                   3
      Recognition                                  5
      Representation                               5
Association Leave                                 34

Bargaining Unit                                   6
Board of Education:
      Definition                                   4
      Authority                                    5
      Policy                                       5
Bulletin Board Space                              44

Care of Newborn Child                             33
Civil Liability Insurance                         22
Civil or Criminal Proceedings                     22
Committees:
      Class Size                                  43
      Curriculum                                  42
      Professional Planning                       42
      School Building                             41
Community School Employment                       28
Consultation Periods                              18
Consultants for Negotiations                       6
Continued Employment                              15
Contract:
      Determination of                            16
      Nonrenewal of                               35
      Relation to Agreement                        4
      Violation of                                 7
      Voluntary Termination of                    38
Contract Teacher                                   3
Credit on Salary Schedule                         13

Days of Work                                      17
Disability, Verification of                       29
Discrimination                                     4


                                         60
Disruptive Student Behavior                21
District Retirement Benefit                40
Dual Medical Coverage                      39
Dues Deduction                             40
Duties, Performance of                     15
Duty-Free Lunch                            18

Early Retirement Incentive                 41
Elementary Planning Time                  19-20
Elementary Vacancies                       25
Employment, Periods of                     12
Evaluation                                 22

Facilities for Teachers                    17
Forms:
       Grievance                          47-48
       Lane Change                         50
       Personal Leave                      55
       Special Employment Contract         50
FTE Determination                          16

Grievance Procedure                        7

Hearings:
      Formal                               36
      Grievance                             8
      Informal                             11
      Termination & Nonrenewal            35-36

Impasse                                     7
Increments                                 13
Insurance:
      Liability                            22
      Life                                 39
      Medical                              39
      Worker’s Compensation                40

Lane Advancement                           13
Leaves of Absence:
     Adoption                              34
     Association Leave                     34
     Care of Newborn Child                 33
     Death in Family                       31
     Family Illness                        31
     Jury Duty                             33


                                     61
      Leave Without Pay                   33
      Military Leave                      33
      Personal Leave                      31
      Public Office Leave                 33
      Sabbatical Leave                    31
      Special Use of Sick Leave           30
Listing of Teachers                       44
Lunch Periods                             18
Lunch Supervision                         18

Mediation                                  7
Mileage Allowance & Reimbursements        14
Military Service, Credit for              13
Misuse of Sick Leave                      29

Negotiations                               6
New School Vacancy Postings               26
Non-CACTUS Credit for Lane Changes        14

Parking Facilities                        17
Part-Time Contract                        16
Payment of Salaries                       14
Performance of Duties                     15
Personnel Files                           23
Posting of Vacancies                      24
Preamble                                   3
Preparation Periods                       18
Promotions                                28
Proration of Insurance Premium            39
Provisional Contract Teacher               3

Recall                                    38
Recognition of Association                 5
Reduction in Force                        37
Regular Contract Teacher                   3
Released Time for GEA President           43
Resignation                               38
Restrooms                                 17

Salaries:
      Basis for Determining               12
      Experience Credit                   12
      Salary Schedule                     46
School Day                                17
Secondary Vacancies                       25


                                     62
Special Employment Contract                 50
Specially Funded Program Teachers           15
Substitutes, Regular Teachers as            18
Surplus Teachers                            27
Suspension                                  35

Teacher, Definition of                       3
Teacher Evaluation                          51
Teacher Files                               23
Teaching Assignments                        21
Teaching Hours                              17
Teaching Load                               19
Telephones                                  17
Temporary Teacher                            3
Termination of Contract                     35
Training, Salary Credit for                 13
Transcripts of Credit                       13
Transfers
      Teacher Requests for Transfers        26
      Administrative Transfers              28

Vacancies                                   24

Working Days                                17




                                       63
