           PROFESSIONAL AGREEMENT



                        between



          THE BOARD OF EDUCATION OF

            GRANITE SCHOOL DISTRICT



                          and



THE GRANITE EDUCATION ASSOCIATION INCORPORATED



                  Covering the Period



           July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2023



                Granite School District

                2500 South State Street

              Salt Lake City, Utah 84115




                           1
                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS

Article                   Subject                                     Page
       Preamble                                                              3
1      Definitions                                                           3
2      General Provisions                                                    5
3      Board of Education Rights and Responsibilities                        5
4      Recognition                                                           6
5      Negotiations                                                          7
6      Grievance Procedure                                                   8
7      Employment                                                            13
8      Teacher Facilities                                                    18
9      Teaching Hours and Teaching Load                                      18
10     Class-Free Planning & Preparation Time for Elementary Teachers        20
11     Teaching Assignments                                                  22
12     Disruptive Student Behavior                                           23
13     Protection of Teachers from Assaults                                  23
14     Teacher Evaluation                                                    24
15     Teacher Files                                                         24
16     Posting of Vacancies, Transfers, and Promotions                       26
17     Adult and Community School Employment                                 29
18     Leaves of Absence                                                     30
19     Suspension, Termination and Non-Renewal of Contract                   36
20     Insurance Programs                                                    40
21     Worker’s Compensation                                                 42
22     Dues Deduction                                                        42
23     District Retirement Benefit                                           42
24     School Building Professional Committee                                44
25     Professional Planning Committee                                       45
26     District Curriculum Committee                                         45
27     Class Size Review Committee                                           45
28     Released Time for GEA President                                       46
29     Listing of Teachers                                                   46
30     Bulletin Board Space                                                  47
31     Duration and Effect of Agreement                                      47
32     Board Policy, Numbered Memorandum                                     47
Appendices                                                                   48
A      Salary Schedule                                                       49
B      Grievance Form                                                        50
C      Application for Lane Advancement                                      52
D      Prior Approval Form                                                   53
E      Special Employment Contract                                           54
F      Teacher Application for Personal Leave                                56
G      School District and Utah Schools for the Deaf and Blind Employee      57
Index Requirements                                                           58


                                             2
                                        PREAMBLE



The Board of Education of Granite School District (hereinafter referred to as the "Board") and the
Granite Education Association, Inc. (hereinafter referred to as the "Association") hereby agree as
follows:

                                           ARTICLE 1

                                         DEFINITIONS

1.1    Teacher shall mean all professional employees of the District who are paid on the teacher
       salary schedule and who are required to be and are licensed by the State Board of
       Education, including teachers on leave of absence, granted pursuant to this Agreement,
       and excluding district administrative coordinators and all employees who are paid from the
       administrative salary schedule.

1.2    Provisional Contract Teacher shall mean all regularly assigned teachers working half-
       time or more each day who have not yet completed three continuous years of contract
       employment as a teacher in Granite School District. Regular contract teachers who have an
       interruption in service of six years or more shall be provisional contract teachers for the
       first year following their return.

1.3    Regular Contract Teacher shall mean all regularly assigned teachers (except specially
       funded program teachers), working half-time or more each day, and who have completed
       the provisional period described above

1.4    Temporary Teacher shall mean all teachers who are employed after the first day of the
       second semester and all other teachers hired on a limited short-term basis. Temporary
       teachers are not covered by this Agreement. Limited short-term basis shall not exceed one
       semester.

1.5    One-year-only Teacher shall mean all teachers who are employed after the first day of
       the second semester and all other teachers hired on a limited, short-term basis. Possible
       one-year-only contracts include, but are not limited to, leave of absence; specially funded
       grant programs; fractional FTE; licensure issues; change of school programs, etc.

1.6    Part-time Teacher shall mean all teachers who are employed less than half-time each day.
       Part-time teachers are not covered by this Agreement and are not eligible for fringe
       benefits.

1.7    Specially Funded Program Teacher shall mean all teachers who do not have regular
       contract teacher status in the District immediately prior to being hired to staff special
       programs that are funded by agencies other than the District. Specially funded program

                                                 3
       teachers are covered by this Agreement and are eligible for fringe benefits. Any
       discontinuance or curtailment of funds by the program's funding agency shall constitute
       the discontinuance of a particular service (i.e. program) within the meaning of Section.
       https://le.utah.gov/xcode/Title53G/Chapter11/53G-11-P5.html?v=C53G-11-
       P5_2018012420180124.

1.8    Association shall mean the Granite Education Association.

1.9    District shall mean the Granite School District in the County of Salt Lake and State of
       Utah.

1.10   Board shall mean the Granite School District Board of Education.

1.11   School Year shall mean the period of time established by the official school calendar
       adopted by the Board.

1.12   Seniority shall mean length of continuous and current employment as a teacher under
       contract in the District.

1.13   Semester hours includes the computational equivalent in quarter hours (quarter hours *
       2/3 = semester hours or semester hours * 3/2 = quarter hours).

1.14   Salary schedule shall mean steps and lanes.

1.15   Instructional Coach shall mean all teachers who are paid on the teachers’ salary schedule
       who work with teachers in a coaching capacity and are assigned to a school building(s). A
       coach has no administrative authority to conduct evaluations. Observations are done to
       support the teacher.

1.16   Specialist/Interventionist shall mean all teachers who are paid on the teachers’ salary
       schedule who work with teachers in specified areas of request, whether by teacher request
       or administrative request. The specialists/interventionists are assigned by the district
       office and report to the specific district administrator for whom they work. A specialist
       may report to the administration what areas are being addressed. While they may conduct
       observations, they have no administrative authority to conduct evaluations.

1.17   Coordinator shall mean all teachers who are paid on the teachers’ salary schedule who
       work with teachers in specified areas of request, whether by teacher request or
       administrative request. The coordinators are assigned by the district office and reports to
       the specific district office director for whom they work. While they may conduct
       observations, they have no administrative authority to conduct evaluations.




                                                 4
                                            ARTICLE 2

                                    GENERAL PROVISIONS

2.1    In line with the Board's policy of not discriminating against any teacher on the basis of
       race, color, sex, pregnancy, religion, national origin, marital status, disability, sexual
       orientation, gender identity, or any other legally protected classification; and the
       Association's policy of admitting persons to membership without discrimination on the
       basis of race, color, sex, pregnancy, religion, national origin, marital status, disability,
       sexual orientation, gender identity, or any other legally protected classification, it is agreed
       that none of these conditions will be preconditions of employment. It is further agreed that
       the Board shall not discriminate against a teacher on the basis of membership, non-
       membership, or official position in any teacher organization.

2.2    This Agreement shall be a part of each individual teacher's contract.

2.3    The Board, the Association, all teachers covered by this Agreement, and all provisions of
       this Agreement are subject to the laws and Constitution of the State of Utah and of the
       United States, and to the regulations and orders of state and federal governmental
       agencies. Any provisions of this Agreement found to be in violation of such laws,
       regulations, and orders shall be null and void; however, this section shall not operate to
       impair any agreement or contract during the term of the Agreement of contract.

2.4    Pursuant to state law, the Board may enter into individual employment contracts without
       violating this Agreement.



                                            ARTICLE 3

                                  BOARD OF EDUCATION
                               RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

3.1    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Agreement, the Board retains and
       reserves unto itself the sole and exclusive right to the executive management and
       administrative control of the school system, along with all other rights, powers, authority,
       duties, and responsibilities conferred upon and vested in it by the laws and Constitution of
       the State of Utah and the United States, including, but not limited to, the following rights
       and responsibilities:

3.1.1 to determine and administer policy;

3.1.2 to establish courses of instruction, including special programs, and to provide for athletic,
      recreational, and social events for students;

3.1.3 to hire all teachers and, subject to the provisions of law, to determine their qualifications
                                                  5
       and the conditions for their continued employment, or their dismissal or demotion, and to
       promote and transfer all such employees;

3.1.4 to determine the responsibilities and assignments of teachers;

3.1.5 to make and enforce all needful rules and regulations for the control and management of
      the public schools of the District;

3.1.6 to do all things needful for the maintenance, prosperity, and success of the schools and the
      promotion of education.

3.2    The Board recognizes the role of professional educators in determining and providing for
       the educational needs of students. Therefore, the Board will provide opportunities for the
       involvement and participation of teachers individually and through the Association in
       planning and developing the best possible programs for students and teachers of the
       District.

                                           ARTICLE 4

                                         RECOGNITION

4.1    Representative. The Board recognizes the Association as the exclusive representative of
       the teachers provided, however, any individual teacher shall have the right to present
       grievances with or without representation by the Association in accordance with the
       Grievance Procedure provided herein (see Article 6); and provided further, that nothing in
       this Agreement shall be so construed as to deprive any individuals of their rights under the
       Utah Right to Work Law.

4.2    Bargaining Unit. The appropriate unit for purposes of negotiating terms and conditions of
       employment is comprised of all teachers, as herein defined, employed by Granite School
       District.

4.3    Continued Recognition. The Board shall continue to recognize the Association as the
       exclusive representative for the term of this Agreement or any renewal thereof, provided,
       however, that if the Board has cause to believe that a majority of the members of the
       bargaining unit have not designated or selected the Association as their representative, the
       Board may request and shall be furnished (by the Association) with proof of such
       designation or selection by such majority. If the Association fails to provide such proof, it
       shall not be recognized as the exclusive representative of the teachers.

4.4    Scheduling. The Board recognizes the need for the Association to be able to conduct
       Association business. When possible, GSD agrees not to schedule any meetings, trainings,
       or other activities that require teacher attendance after teacher contract time on the second
       Wednesday of each month.


                                                 6
                                          ARTICLE 5

                                       NEGOTIATIONS

5.1   Negotiating Teams. The Board, or designated representatives appointed to serve on its
      team, will meet with representatives designated by the Association for the purpose of
      establishing procedures for negotiating and reaching mutually satisfactory agreements.
      Each party's negotiating team shall consist of not more than five members.

5.2   A meeting to open negotiations will be held no later than the first day of April unless
      mutually agreed upon by both parties.

5.3   Schedule of Meetings. Negotiations will be conducted at times and places mutually
      agreeable to the negotiators named by each party.

5.4   Before negotiations begin on specific items, the Association shall submit, in writing,
      specific initial proposals on any items it wishes to negotiate. The Board shall respond
      within two weeks with specific written proposals to open for negotiation any items the
      Board wishes to negotiate that may not have been included among the initial proposals of
      the Association. After this initial exchange of proposals, no new subjects for negotiation
      may be introduced by either party without mutual consent. The initial proposals of both
      parties shall constitute the agenda, with the discussion order to be jointly agreed upon
      before negotiations begin on specific items.

5.5   Conducting Negotiations. The negotiation teams will meet in closed sessions, unless
      otherwise agreed upon mutually in advance. All proposals must be channeled through the
      negotiation teams at the table. The teams will present relevant data, exchange points of
      view, and make proposals and counterproposals. Upon request by either party, the other
      shall make available for inspection its public records and data pertinent to the subject
      under negotiation.

5.6   Consultants. Either party may utilize the services of consultants to assist in negotiations.

5.7   Release from other Duties. If negotiations are scheduled during the school day, the
      negotiators shall be released from regular duties without loss of pay.

5.8   Adopting Agreement. To reach tentative agreement, all understandings must be produced
      in writing, dated, and signed by both parties at the time tentative agreement is reached. All
      such agreements achieved in process will remain tentative pending completion of an
      agreement on the entire package. Tentative agreement on the entire package must also be
      produced in writing and signed by both parties at the time the complete tentative
      agreement is reached. Such agreements shall be recommended to the Board and the
      Association for approval by both negotiating teams. The complete agreement shall become
      final upon ratification by the Board and the Association.

                                                7
5.9    Impasse. If agreement is not reached on all items, either party may declare to the other in
       writing that an impasse exists and call for a mediator. A written request for mediation shall
       be considered a joint request, and the other party shall join in the request.

5.9.1 Mediation.

       5.9.1.1   Within ten days after declaration of an impasse, both parties shall submit the
                 items at impasse to a mediator through the Federal Mediation and Conciliation
                 Service.

       5.9.1.2 The mediator shall endeavor to assist the parties in overcoming the impasse and
               reaching agreement on the issues at impasse. The mediator’s efforts shall be
               limited to the issues at impasse.

       5.9.1.3 The parties agree to cooperate by meeting with the mediator promptly and
               making available at the mediator’s request any public records and data pertinent
               to the issues at impasse.

        5.9.2    In the event that mediation efforts are not successful in resolving the issues, both
                 parties shall make such further efforts to reach agreement as mutually agreed to
                 by both negotiating teams.

5.10   The rules of procedure listed in this article may be changed at any time by mutual consent
       of both teams.



                                            ARTICLE 6

                                   GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

6.1    Definition. Grievance shall mean a complaint by a teacher that there has been an alleged
       violation, misinterpretation, or misapplication of any of the provisions of this Agreement
       affecting that teacher.

6.2    Procedure. It is the intent of the District and the Association to attempt to resolve all
       grievances promptly, informally and confidentially, at the lowest possible administrative
       level, in accordance with the following procedure:

6.2.1 Step One - Oral Grievance

       6.2.1.1   The teacher with a grievance must first attempt to resolve it informally by
                 discussing the issue with their direct supervisor (school level principal or district
                 office director) within ten working days after the teacher became aware of the act
                 or condition upon which the grievance is based.


                                                  8
      6.2.1.2   The principal or district office director shall have up to 10 working days after
                learning of the grievance to consider the matter and give the principal’s or
                district office director’s answer orally to the employee.

6.2.2 Step Two - Written Grievance

      6.2.2.1   If the grievance is not resolved informally in step one, the teacher may file the
                grievance with the principal or district office director in writing within ten
                working days after receiving the answer in step one.

      6.2.2.2   The written grievance shall:

                A.   describe the nature of the grievance and the facts giving rise to it;
                B.   note the provisions alleged to be violated, misinterpreted, or
                     misapplied and the position of the teacher with respect to such
                     provisions; and
                C.   state the specific remedy requested to resolve the grievance.

      6.2.2.3   The principal or district office director shall have up to 10 working days after
                receiving the written grievance to investigate the matter, make a decision, and
                communicate the decision in writing to the teacher.

6.2.3 Step Three - Appeal of Written Grievance

      6.2.3.1   If no mutually agreeable settlement is reached in step two, the teacher may file
                the grievance with the Association, and the Association may submit the written
                grievance to the Superintendent within 10 working days after receiving the
                answer in step two, requesting that the principal's or district office director’s
                decision be reviewed.

      6.2.3.2   The Superintendent or the Superintendent’s designee shall assign a grievance
                examiner within ten working days after receiving the written grievance from the
                Association.

      6.2.3.3   The grievance examiner shall schedule a hearing not fewer than ten working days
                or more than 20 working days after receiving the assignment, except upon mutual
                agreement between the parties.

      6.2.3.4   The grievance examiner shall receive and review such evidence as the parties
                present that is relevant to the grievance and shall thereupon determine the facts of
                the matter; whether or not the Agreement has been violated, misinterpreted, or
                misapplied; and report these determinations with recommendations to the
                Superintendent or the Superintendent’s designee within five working days
                following the meeting.

      6.2.3.5   The Superintendent or the Superintendent’s designee shall make a decision
                                                 9
                within ten working days after receiving the grievance examiner’s report and
                communicate the decision in writing to the parties concerned.

6.2.4 Step Four - Impartial Third-Party Hearing

      6.2.4.1   In the event that no mutually agreeable settlement is reached in the foregoing
                procedure, the teacher may, within 15 working days after receiving the decision
                of the Superintendent or the Superintendent’s designee in step three, request that
                the Association file a petition in the Superintendent’s office requesting that the
                matter be referred to an impartial third party from outside the District for review
                and recommendations.

      6.2.4.2   Representatives of the Superintendent and the Association shall agree upon an
                impartial third-party hearing examiner from outside the District within ten
                working days after receipt of notice of referral. The hearing examiner shall be
                notified of their selection by a joint letter from the District and the Association
                stating the issue(s) and requesting that the hearing examiner a date and time for
                the hearing.

      6.2.4.3   The hearing examiner shall have no authority to amend, modify, nullify, ignore,
                add to, or subtract from the provisions of this Agreement. The hearing
                examiner’s authority shall be strictly limited to making a recommendation to the
                Board regarding only the specific issue or issues submitted to the hearing
                examiner in writing by the District and the Association. The examiner shall have
                no authority to make recommendations on any other issue not so submitted. The
                examiner shall have no power to make recommendations contrary to or
                inconsistent with the law. The recommendations to the Board must be based
                solely upon the examiner’s interpretation of the meaning or application of the
                express relevant language of this Agreement to the facts of the grievance
                presented. The hearing examiner shall submit recommendations in writing to the
                teacher, the District, and the Association within 20 working days after the close
                of the hearing or the submission of agreed upon briefs by the parties, whichever
                is later, unless the parties agree to an extension thereof.

      6.2.4.4   In the hearing, neither party shall be permitted to introduce any evidence which
                was not presented in steps one through three. In the event that new evidence is
                discovered that might have bearing on the grievance, the grievance will return to
                step two.

      6.2.4.5   The recommendation of the hearing examiner to the Board shall be advisory
                only. The Board shall make a final disposition of the case within 20 working days
                after receiving the recommendation(s) of the hearing examiner, unless the parties
                agree to an extension. The decision of the Board shall be submitted in writing to
                all parties and shall be final and binding on all parties to the grievance, provided
                                                10
                 the Board in its decision does not exceed its authority as established in the law.

      6.2.4.6    Expenses for the hearing examiner's services shall be shared equally by the
                 District and the Association for grievances brought by the Association but not for
                 grievances brought by teachers or other associations on their own behalf. In
                 those situations, the teacher, or association representing the teacher, will be
                 responsible to share the costs with the District.

      6.2.4.7    Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of the teacher to appeal the
                 Board's decision to an appropriate court of law.

6.3   General Provisions

      6.3.1     Group Grievance. A grievance may be initiated in behalf of a group of teachers
                by the Association or by any member of the group designated by them to serve as
                their representative. Whoever initiates a grievance on behalf of a group shall begin
                at step one if all members of the group are in the same school. If the members of
                the group are in different schools, the group grievance may begin at step three.
                Group grievances shall list by name the teachers on whose behalf and with whose
                consent the grievance is filed.

      6.3.2     Individual Complaint. Nothing contained herein may be construed as limiting the
                right of a teacher with a complaint to have the complaint adjusted without recourse
                to the grievance procedure and with or without representation by the Association,
                provided that the adjustment is consistent with the terms of this Agreement. When
                a teacher is not represented by the Association, the Association will have the
                opportunity to be present beyond the level of the principal or immediate supervisor.

      6.3.3     Time Limits. No grievance shall be entertained or processed unless it is submitted
                within 10 working days after the teacher became aware of the act or condition upon
                which the grievance is based. If the principal or the District does not answer a
                grievance or an appeal thereof within the specified time limit, or mutually agreed
                extension thereof, the teacher involved may move the grievance to the next step. If
                the teacher does not advance a grievance to the next step within the specified time
                limit, or mutually agreed extension thereof, following the date when a district
                decision was due or given, the grievance shall be considered withdrawn without
                prejudice.

6.3.4 Meetings and Representation

      6.3.4.1 Meetings specified under this procedure shall be conducted at times and places
              which will afford a fair and reasonable opportunity for all necessary persons,
              including witnesses, to attend. Such meetings shall be conducted during non-
              working hours unless there is mutual agreement for other arrangements.

                                                 11
      6.3.4.2 In any grievance meetings, all of the parties directly involved shall have the right
              to be accompanied, advised, or represented by a person of their own choosing.

      6.3.4.3 Meetings beyond step one, specified under this procedure, will not be held without
              prior notification to the Association or without providing the opportunity for an
              Association representative to be present.

      6.3.5   Reprisals. No reprisal of any kind will be taken by the Board, the administration,
              the Association, or by a teacher against any of the participants in a grievance
              procedure by reason of such participation.

      6.3.6   Grievance File. All documents, communications, and records dealing with
              grievances will be filed in a separate grievance file and will not be kept in the
              District personnel file of any of the participants.

      6.3.7   Sharing of Information. The Board and the Association agree to make available
              to all parties in interest any information in their possession which is not privileged
              under law, but which may have a bearing on decisions reached at any step of the
              grievance procedure.

      6.3.8   Grievance Forms. See Appendix B for sample grievance forms. Grievance forms
              may be obtained at the Human Resources office, the Association office, and at each
              school.

6.4   Informal Hearing Procedures

      6.4.1   An informal hearing means a meeting between a teacher covered by the Agreement
              and the Assistant Superintendent or the Assistant Superintendent’s designee (other
              than the direct supervisor of the teacher’s administrator) of the teacher’s division.

      6.4.2   Teachers claiming that records in their personnel files are inaccurate are entitled to
              an informal hearing pursuant to Article 15.3.5. Teachers who are suspended with
              or without pay are entitled to an informal hearing pursuant to Article 19.3.

      6.4.3   In informal hearings, all parties directly involved shall have the right to be
              accompanied, advised, or represented by a person of their own choosing. Informal
              hearings shall not be held without providing adequate notice of the hearing to the
              Association and opportunity for the Association to participate in the hearing. The
              Assistant Superintendent or the Assistant Superintendent’s designee who will
              conduct the informal hearing, may establish reasonable procedures to facilitate
              clarity and order. Such procedures may include time allotments, order of
              presentation, etc. If the Assistant Superintendent, or the Assistant Superintendent’s
              designee, elects to establish procedures for a particular informal hearing, those
              procedures shall be communicated to all parties in a timely manner.

                                                12
      6.4.4     The Assistant Superintendent or the Assistant Superintendent’s designee shall
                make a decision within ten working days after the informal hearing and
                communicate the decision in writing to the teacher.



                                           ARTICLE 7

                                         EMPLOYMENT

7.1   Periods of Employment. The days of employment within the period set out in the contract
      shall be designated by the Board in the official school calendar.

7.2   Basis for Determining Salaries. Each teacher's annual contract salary shall be determined
      by placement on the salary schedule according to verified experience and training as
      follows:

7.2.1 Salary Credit for Experience

      7.2.1.1    Salary Step Placement upon Employment. An experienced teacher shall
                 receive full credit on the salary schedule for the first ten years of public-school
                 teaching experience. Half-time (.50 FTE or more) regular contract teaching
                 experience will be figured cumulatively in arriving at proper step placement.
                 When there is a shortage of qualified candidates for a specific position, additional
                 step credit for verified experience beyond ten years may be allowed by the
                 Human Resources office.

      7.2.1.2    Salary schedule credit for teaching experience under 7.2.1.1 above shall be
                 granted automatically for full-time contracted teaching in a public school. All
                 other teaching experience shall be evaluated by the Human Resources office and
                 the amount of credit granted shall depend upon the extent to which such
                 experience is equivalent to public school teaching. All credited teaching
                 experience must be officially verified.

      7.2.1.3    Annual Increments. Continuing teachers shall receive a one-step salary
                 increment on the salary schedule for each year of successful teaching in the
                 District until they reach the maximum step of their salary lane. Such salary
                 increments shall be given at the beginning of each contract year by moving
                 forward one step on the salary schedule all continuing contract teachers who
                 successfully completed at least one-half year (.50 FTE) of contract teaching
                 during the previous school year.

      7.2.1.4    Contract teachers returning from military leave shall be granted credit on the
                 salary schedule in accordance with the Uniformed Services Employment and
                 Reemployment Rights Act, USERRA.
                                                 13
7.2.2 Salary Credit for Professional Learning

      7.2.2.1   Within thirty days following beginning date of employment, a teacher new to the
                District must supply the District Human Resources office with official up-to-date
                transcripts of all college credits. Transcripts become the property of the District
                and are not returned upon termination of employment.

      7.2.2.2   Placement on the A Lane (Bachelor’s), D Lane (Master’s), or G Lane (Doctorate)
                is dependent upon verification of the degree and a teaching certificate. Credit to
                be applied toward the B Lane (Bachelor’s plus 20 semester hours) and the C
                Lane (Bachelor’s plus 40 semester hours) must have been earned subsequent to
                meeting the requirements for the bachelor’s degree and a teaching certificate.
                Credit to be applied toward the E Lane (Master’s plus 20 semester hours) and the
                F Lane (Master’s plus 40 semester hours) must have been earned subsequent to
                meeting the requirements for the master’s degree and a teaching certificate. The
                employee must furnish evidence that all of the degree requirements have been
                met. All college credit must be granted by a four-year college or university
                which has been accredited by the National Council for the Accreditation of
                Teacher Education (NCATE), or by one of the six regional accrediting
                associations, including continuing education and distance learning (Exception:
                Salt Lake Community College). Initial micro-credentials credits, issued by the
                USBE and NEA, will be accepted for lane change credit.

      7.2.2.3   Application for lane advancement on the salary schedule must be made on the
                official form provided by the Human Resources office (see Appendix C.)
                Applications must be supported by complete official transcripts of credit (report
                cards will not suffice), verifying the credit requested. Lane change will become
                effective on the date the completed application form, and all official
                documentation forms, are received by the Human Resources office. The lane
                change will be made on the next payroll cutoff date, and the salary increase will
                be reflected on the paycheck following that payroll cutoff date. The total amount
                paid for the year from the new lane will be prorated based upon the number of
                contract working days remaining as of the date when all necessary materials are
                received by the Human Resources office.

      7.2.2.4   Prior Approval Credit. Upon recommendation of the School Leadership and
                Improvement office, Prior Approval credit may be used toward lane advancement
                on the salary schedule. Prior Approval forms must be submitted and approved
                prior to the professional learning activity. See Appendix D.

      7.2.2.5   Professional learning credit may be used in qualifying for salary lane
                advancement according to the following provisions:

                A.   All USBE approved professional learning credit will count towards lane
                                                14
                     change. USBE and NEA initial micro-credentials credits will count towards
                     lane change.

               B.    Evidence of credit (e.g. transcripts, USBE report, Prior Approval form, etc.)
                     is to be submitted to Human Resources, and is the responsibility of the
                     teacher.

               C.    Lane change appeals will be directed to the Human Resources office.

7.3   Payment of Salaries

      7.3.1   Paychecks will be made available to employees twice per month on the 15th and
              the last district working day per month, as per the district twelve-month calendar.

      7.3.2   When paychecks are given out prior to the end of the month in accordance with the
              above provisions, payments of withholdings to the credit union, annuity
              companies, and various other insurance agencies will not necessarily be remitted
              on the day paychecks are issued.

      7.3.3   All employees paid from the teacher salary schedule, who by regular assignment,
              must travel between two or more district schools or approved locations on the same
              day, will receive an automobile allowance each month for the term of their
              contract. Itinerant employees hired by district directors are not eligible for car
              allowance. The amount of the monthly car allowance for each qualifying teacher
              will depend on the number of days each week that the teacher is regularly assigned
              to two or more locations:

                     Two or More Locations
                     5 Days Per Week $90.00              2 Days Per Week         $36.00
                     4 Days Per Week $72.00              1 Day Per Week          $18.00
                     3 Days Per Week $54.00

              In addition to the above automobile allowances, all employees of the District are
              entitled to mileage reimbursement according to the terms of Administrative
              Memorandum Number Thirty-Five.




                                               15
7.4   Teaching License

      7.4.1   Before reporting for duty, teachers employed under this Agreement shall comply
              with all necessary licensure and/or endorsement requirements of the Utah State
              Board of Education.

      7.4.2   The licenses specified above must be registered with Human Resources within
              thirty days following the beginning date of employment.

7.5   Performance of Duties

      7.5.1   The teacher agrees to follow the rules, regulations, and policies of the Board and to
              perform the duties assigned to the teacher under the direction of the principal and
              the Superintendent, at the time and place appointed by the Board or the Board's
              designee. Duties may not be assigned arbitrarily or capriciously.

      7.5.2   Acts in violation of this Agreement, or of the rules, regulations, and policies of the
              Board, or failure to perform duties assigned to the teacher, may constitute a breach
              of contract and subject the teacher to disciplinary action.

      7.5.3   If a teacher is required to follow a Board policy or perform a duty that the teacher
              believes to be in violation of this Agreement, the appropriate course of action for
              the teacher is to use the grievance procedure provided herein.

7.6   Continued Employment

      7.6.1   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Agreement, regular contract
              teachers doing satisfactory work will be continued in employment on a year-to-year
              basis until they retire.

      7.6.2   Provisional contract teachers and specially funded program teachers shall sign the
              District's Special Employment Contract.

      7.6.3   Provisional contract teachers are employed for a specified period of time only, as
              defined in the Special Employment Contract that they sign. Provisional contract
              teachers shall have no right or expectation of continued employment beyond the
              term specified in their Special Employment Contract. (See Appendix E.)

      7.6.4   Specially Funded Program teachers doing satisfactory work, who have completed
              their three-year provisional period, may expect continued employment in successive
              years unless there is a curtailment or discontinuance of funds in their program. Any
              such curtailment or discontinuance of funds shall justify non-renewal of teacher
              contracts in that program. Such non-renewals shall not be considered a violation of
              this Agreement, and the teachers involved shall not be entitled to a formal hearing
              under Utah Administrative Code 53G.

                                                 16
7.7     Determination of Contract Full-Time Equivalency (FTE) for Secondary Teachers

        7.7.1   The determination of contract FTE for secondary teachers shall be based on the
                number of teaching periods assigned. In a school with a seven-period day, the
                normal full-time load is six (6) teaching periods plus one consultation/preparation
                period per day. (See 9.8.)

        7.7.2   In a school with a four-period block day, the normal full-time load is three (3)
                teaching periods and one (1) consultation/preparation period per day.

        7.7.3   In a school with a five-period block day, the normal full-time load is four (4)
                teaching periods and one (1) consultation/preparation period per day.

Seven-Period Traditional Schedule
Full-time teaching consists of six (6) periods out of seven (7) periods with one (1) consultation.
 Teaching Periods     Proportion of Full- FTE                     Contract Status       Consultation Periods
                      time
 1                    1/6 = 0.17              0.17                No                    No
 2                    2/6 = 0.34              0.34                No                    No
 3                    3/6 = 0.50              0.50                Yes                   Yes – One
 4                    4/6 = 0.67              0.67                Yes                   Yes – One
 5                    5/6 = 0.83              0.83                Yes                   Yes – One
 6                    6/6 = 1.0               1.0                 Yes                   Yes – One

Four-Period A/B Block Schedule
Full-time teaching consists of six (6) periods out of eight (8) periods with two (2) consultations.
 Teaching Periods     Proportion of Full FTE                       Contract Status      Consultation Periods
                      time
 1                    1/6 = 0.17              0.17                 No                   No
 2                    2/6 = 0.34              0.34                 No                   No
 3                    3/6 = 0.50              0.50                 Yes                  Yes – One prorated
 4                    4/6 = 0.67              0.67                 Yes                  Yes – Two prorated
 5                    5/6 = 0.83              0.83                 Yes                  Yes – Two prorated
 6                    6/6 = 1.0               1.0                  Yes                  Yes – Two full

Five Period A/B Block Schedule
Full-time teaching consists of eight (8) periods out of ten (10) periods and two (2) consultation
periods.
 Teaching Periods     Proportion of Full- FTE                      Contract Status      Consultation Periods
                      time
 1                    1/8 = 0.125             0.125                No                   No
 2                    2/8 = 0.25              0.25                 No                   No
 3                    3/8 =0.375              0.375                No                   No
 4                    4/8 = 0.50              0.50                 Yes                  Yes – one full
 5                    5/8 = 0.625             0.625                Yes                  Yes – two prorated
 6                    6/8 = 0.75              0.75                 Yes                  Yes – two prorated
 7                    7/8 = 0.875             0.875                Yes                  Yes – two prorated
 8                    8/8 = 1.0               1.0                  Yes                  Yes – two full




                                                     17
      7.7.4   This approach has the effect of pro-rating the consultation/preparation period for
              teachers working less than full-time. Contract teachers with less than full-time FTE
              will be expected to perform their prorated share of consultation/preparation time
              and to assume their pro-rated share of necessary professional duties.

      7.7.5   Contractual leave benefits will be extended to cover the extra period for teachers
              who have agreed to teach an extra period during the regular school day.

      7.7.6   In the event the Board of Education approves a school-day schedule different from
              the day described in 7.7.1., 7.7.2., or 7.7.3, the District and Association will jointly
              develop an FTE calculation grid.



                                           ARTICLE 8

                                     TEACHER FACILITIES

8.1   Each school will be provided with well-ventilated, clean, adequate, separate rest rooms for
      teachers.

8.2   There shall be a furnished room in each school to be used as a faculty lounge.

8.3   Each school shall have telephone service available to teachers that provides privacy of
      conversation.

8.4   Space in the parking lot at each school will be reserved for the parking of teachers' cars.



                                           ARTICLE 9

                        TEACHING HOURS AND TEACHING LOAD

9.1   Teachers shall be required to work on the days specified in the official school calendar and
      according to the schedule of opening and closing schools as determined by the Board.
      Mandatory professional development days shall not be scheduled on Saturdays or Sundays.
      Except for special orientation meetings for new teachers, teachers who are required to work
      extra days before or after the dates specified in the official calendar shall receive additional
      compensation at their appropriate daily rate.

9.2   Teaching hours do not apply to extra duty assignments, see “UHSAA and/or Extra
      Compensation Program.”




                                                 18
9.3   School Day

      9.3.1   Elementary teachers shall report to work no less than 20 minutes before the regular
              beginning time of the school day and shall remain on duty for at least 15 minutes
              after the closing time of school.

      9.3.2   Secondary teachers shall report to work no less than 30 minutes before the regular
              beginning time of the school day and shall remain on duty for at least 20 minutes
              after the regular closing time of school. In schools starting before 8:00 a.m., these
              time provisions may be reversed. Junior High contract time on Fridays is 2:45 p.m.

9.4   Faculty Meeting. The principal, in consultation with the School Building Professional
      Committee, will make decisions relating to faculty meetings.

      9.4.1   Faculty meetings shall not exceed two per month, except when cleared by a School
              Leadership and Improvement Director in collaboration with the Executive Director
              of the Association and/or in the event of an emergency. Faculty meetings shall not
              exceed one per month beginning in the 2021-2022 school year.

      9.4.2   Faculty meetings are to be used to manage the logistical operations of the school
              and to enhance communication with the faculty. For the 2020-2021 calendar years,
              one faculty meeting per month in September, November, February, and April may
              be used for professional development and shall not exceed 60 minutes.

9.5   Duty Free Lunch. All teachers shall have an uninterrupted, duty-free lunch period of at
      least 30 minutes daily, not counting passing time, except for teachers with assigned lunch-
      time responsibilities. Assigned supervisory duty, or other duty, shall not exceed 10 minutes
      in any lunch period.

      9.5.1   In order to assist in lunch-time supervisory duties, and to reduce and minimize the
              number of lunch-time duties for teachers, the District will budget an amount of
              money annually for lunch supervision programs. The total amount will be
              determined in negotiations and will be allocated to the schools on an as-needed
              basis.

      9.5.2   At the elementary level, principals will use allocated funds to hire part-time
              teacher aides (if available) to assist in lunch-time supervisory duties. If no aides can
              be hired for this purpose, teachers who agree to perform the duties otherwise
              assigned to the aides will be compensated at the Secondary Lunch Monitor rate
              (Classified Lane dd) until an aide can be hired.

      9.5.3   At the secondary level, teachers who agree to perform extra lunch-time duties in
              order to reduce lunch-time duties for other teachers will be compensated at the
              Secondary Lunch Monitor rate (Classified Lane dd).

                                                 19
9.6     Normally, secondary teachers will spend preparation and consultation periods at the school;
        however, teachers may on occasion be excused by the principal, or the principal's designee,
        to utilize other facilities for school-related professional purposes to aid the teacher in
        meeting the needs of students.

9.7     When another teacher is in charge of an elementary teacher's class, the regularly assigned
        teacher, under guidelines formulated by the staff and approved by the principal, may leave
        the classroom and use that time as a preparation period, or for other professional purposes.

9.8     Only in case of emergency will teachers be required to serve as substitutes and/or students
        split up and placed in other teachers’ classrooms. Insofar as administratively possible, such
        emergency substituting assignments will be distributed among all faculty members.
        Emergency in this subsection shall mean an unscheduled or unplanned event, or an
        unforeseen combination of circumstances, that calls for immediate action.

        In the event that a substitute teacher is not provided for a contract teacher who has
        requested a substitute for a sick personal or sick family day prior to 6:30 a.m., the absence
        will result in a “failed-to-fill.” In such situations, when contract teachers are asked to cover
        the failed-to-fill, they shall be paid a prorated share of the Level F substitute teacher rate.
        Principals shall reassign substitute teachers, who are scheduled for PLCs or school/district
        level professional learning, to qualifying failed-to-fill classrooms. Secondary teachers who
        cover the failed-to-fill classroom during what would have been their paid consultation
        period will coordinate with their supervisor to fulfill the contractual obligation.

9.9     The teaching load for secondary teachers is defined in Article 7.7. The normal teaching
        assignment for secondary teachers is not more than three teaching preparations and not
        more than two subject areas. The consultation period(s) shall be used for consultation,
        preparation, or other professional purposes.



                                            ARTICLE 10

      CLASS-FREE PLANNING & PREPARATION TIME FOR ELEMENTARY TEACHERS

10. 1 Students in Elementary schools will be dismissed from school one hour and forty minutes
      early one day a week.

10.2    Class-free planning and preparation time shall be used by teachers for planning and
        preparation activities, with the objective of improving instruction, meeting the needs of
        individual students, and improving the coordination of school programs and activities.

        An increase in elementary planning and collaboration time will be added to the one (1) hour
        and 45 minutes per week currently allotted to teachers. Each teacher will be given an
        additional 45-minute block of time weekly. Two times per month this time will be
                                                   20
       dedicated to teacher planning time, and two times per month will be used for collaboration
       time. In the event that the 45-minute planning time falls during an assembly, or other
       scheduled activities, the principal will arrange coverage for the teacher’s students, thus
       guaranteeing that the teacher will still receive planning time. This will be accomplished
       without burdening another teacher with supervision.

                                                Monthly Schedule

                         Regular Weekday                                          Short day
        Week 1    During the day     45 minutes                            (15 min after-school contract time)
                  (specialist)       planning time            Short day    +45 minutes collaboration time
                                                                           +60 minutes planning time


        Week 2    During the day     45 minutes                            (15 min after-school contract time)
                  (specialist)       planning time            Short day    +105 minutes planning time


        Week 3    During the day     45 minutes                            (15 min after-school contract time)
                  (specialist)       planning time            Short day    +45 minutes collaboration time
                                                                           +60 minutes planning time


        Week 4    During the day     45 minutes                            (15 min after-school contract time)
                  (specialist)       planning time            Short day    +105 minutes planning time


        If-       During the day     45 minutes
        Week 5    (specialist)       planning time            Short day    (15 min after-school contract time)
                                                                           +105 minutes planning time


              Total 4-week month planning time is 510 minutes (8.5 hours) and 90 minutes collaboration time

10.3   Normally, elementary teachers will spend planning and preparation time at the school,
       however, teachers may on occasion be excused by the principal, or the principal's designee,
       to utilize other facilities for school-related professional purposes to aid the teacher in
       meeting the needs of students.

10.4   Planning time shall not be used for faculty meetings.

10.5   Professional learning shall not be held during planning time.

10.6   Special education teachers and resource teachers, whose contract and work assignments are
       the same hours as those of regular classroom teachers, will participate in (student) class-
       free planning and preparation times during the same hours and on the same basis as regular
       classroom teachers. Building principals will verify that prep time for Special Education
       teachers is built into the schedule as it is for all other teachers.



                                                      21
10.7   Fine arts (Art) and physical education (PE) teachers assigned to an elementary school on
       planning and preparation time will participate in planning and preparation times at the
       school. In elementary schools, the Board requires Art education and physical education to
       meet the state core standards; therefore, individual planning and preparation for regular
       classroom teacher shall take place while elementary students attend PE and Art classes.
       PE and Art specialists shall have regularly scheduled planning time and a designated
       workspace, as they are like any other educator in the building.




                                           ARTICLE 11

                                   TEACHING ASSIGNMENTS

11.1   With the exception of teachers being transferred, or in the event of district program or
       staffing adjustments, returning teachers shall be notified in writing of their school
       assignment, program, schedule, or grade level assignment for the ensuing year not later
       than April 15 (elementary) and May 1 (secondary). Consultation with the teacher shall take
       place before any written assignment is made. In the event a change must be made during
       the summer or fall, administration must show documentation to the Executive Director of
       the Association and the affected teacher justifying the change.

11.2   In order to assure that students are taught by teachers working within their areas of
       competence, teachers shall not, under normal conditions, be assigned outside the scope of
       their teaching licenses and endorsements.

11.3   District seniority of teachers shall be considered for purposes of school assignment,
       schedule, program, or grade level.

11.4   All regular contract teachers at a school site shall have the opportunity to apply for
       reassignment to any available position at the school site, prior to the position being filled.

11.5   The Board and the Association recognize that a teacher's primary responsibility is to teach.

11.6   Changes in teaching assignments during the school year should be avoided; however,
       enrollment changes or other unforeseen circumstances may make it necessary for the
       principal to make changes in teaching assignments during the year.




                                                  22
                                           ARTICLE 12

                              DISRUPTIVE STUDENT BEHAVIOR

The Board, Administration, and Association believe that educators need to be able to teach without
disruptions from disorderly students and are in full support of teachers, principals, and school staff
in their duties to operate safe, orderly schools and classrooms under reasonable rules governing
school conduct. Appropriate disciplinary measures should be assessed to students when students
make false allegations against an employee that have an affect or impact on the teacher’s
employment. Refer to Administrative Memo #106.



                                           ARTICLE 13

                       PROTECTION OF TEACHERS FROM ASSAULTS

13.1   Teachers shall report in writing, as soon as possible to their principal/supervisor, any
       assault suffered in connection with their employment. The principal/supervisor will forward
       a copy to School Leadership and Improvement. The Superintendent and a law enforcement
       agency shall be notified of any such assault.

13.2   If criminal or civil proceedings are brought against a teacher, alleging the teacher
       committed an assault in connection with their employment, such teacher, after making the
       reports described in Article 13.1 above, may request the Board to furnish legal counsel to
       defend the teacher in such proceedings, insofar as the interest of the teacher and the District
       are not conflicting. If the teacher is found guilty or liable in such proceedings, such finding
       shall constitute a cause for dismissal from the school system. Fines, damages, penalties, or
       forfeitures shall not be paid by the Board.

13.3   Civil liability insurance coverage shall be provided for each teacher. Costs of this coverage
       shall be paid by the Board. Civil liability insurance coverage shall not be deemed to provide
       payment for fines, penalties, or forfeitures arising out of criminal proceedings.

13.4   Whenever a teacher is absent from the teacher’s assignment as a result of personal injury
       caused by an assault arising out of and in the course of the teacher’s employment, the
       teacher shall be paid their full salary for the period of such absence not to exceed 180
       contract days, and such paid absence shall in no event be deducted from any sick or
       personal leave to which such teacher is entitled.

13.5   The Board agrees to reimburse the teacher the market value of any personal property
       damaged or destroyed as a result of assault suffered in connection with the teacher’s
       employment.



                                                  23
13.6   Time lost by a teacher for appearance before a judicial body or legal authority related to an
       assault case directly connected with employment as a teacher in the District, shall result in
       no loss of wages or reduction in accumulated leave.



                                           ARTICLE 14

                                   TEACHER EVALUATION

14.1   Teachers will be evaluated under the provisions of the Utah Administrative code 53G.

14.2   Copies of all formative and summative teacher evaluations will be given to the teacher for
       their personal file. Teacher signatures on such reports and records indicate a knowledge of
       the contents and do not signify approval. The teacher shall have the right to attach or
       submit an explanation, or other written statement regarding any formative or summative
       evaluation, for inclusion in the teacher’s file.

14.3   Summative evaluations, or formative evaluations which could lead to corrective discipline
       or non-renewal, shall only be conducted by fully licensed administrative personnel.



                                           ARTICLE 15

                                        TEACHER FILES

15.1   The official teacher file is the one maintained in the Human Resources Office. Materials
       from files kept in a school shall be used primarily for the improvement of a teacher's
       performance. These files shall be maintained in accordance with 15.3. Documentation
       regarding unsatisfactory performance in the District shall be removed from all school files
       after three years of satisfactory performance and from all district files after five years of
       satisfactory performance.

       Documentation regarding improper teacher conduct in the following areas will remain in
       the file:

              · Conduct which violates the law;
              · Physical contact with students;
              · Conduct involving drugs or alcohol;
              · Sexual conduct.

       Exception: Documentation regarding improper teacher conduct in the above areas will be
       removed from the file if the teacher has been exonerated of all charges.

15.2   A teacher’s file will only be maintained in the District Human Resources Office for as long
       as a person is employed and for five years following their termination. At that time, the file
                                                 24
       will be removed to another storage space and maintained according to the Utah School
       Districts General Retention Schedule.

15.3   All teacher personnel files shall be maintained under the following conditions:

       15.3.1 Materials shall be available at the teacher’s request for inspection except as noted in
              15.3.4 below.

       15.3.2 No unfavorable entry shall be made in a teacher's file unless the teacher has an
              opportunity to read the material before the end of the school year during which the
              principal became aware of the occurrence or condition upon which the entry is
              based. The teacher shall acknowledge that the teacher has read such material by
              providing their signature and the date on the copy to be filed. It is understood that
              the teacher's signature does not indicate agreement with the content of the material
              and will serve only to verify that the material was shown to the teacher. If the
              teacher desires a copy of the material, the teacher may make and keep a copy.

              15.3.2.1        If a teacher refuses to provide their signature on the copy to be filed,
                              such notation will be made on the material.

              15.3.2.2        Only documented statements shall be filed.

       15.3.3 The teacher shall have the right to answer any material filed, and the answer shall be
              reviewed by the Human Resources director and attached to the file copy.

       15.3.4 All legally privileged references and information shall be held in confidence and,
              therefore, are not subject to this Agreement and not available for inspection by the
              teacher. University placement files and references obtained from outside the
              District, or before a person is employed, is privileged material.

       15.3.5 Teachers who claim that material in their file is inaccurate shall be entitled to an
              informal hearing on the matter pursuant to Article 6.4. Material will be removed
              from the teacher's file when a teacher's claim that it is inaccurate has been sustained.

       15.3.6 Complaints, whether verbal or written, shall not be used as the basis for corrective
              action if the teacher has not received notice of the complaint and its detailed
              substance and had opportunity to respond to the supervisor within a reasonable
              period of time following the school’s or district’s receipt of the complaint. Teachers
              may request copies of written complaints or written summaries of verbal
              complaints.

              Hearsay shall not be used as the basis for actions which may be taken against a
              teacher.



                                                 25
                                           ARTICLE 16

               POSTING OF VACANCIES, TRANSFERS, AND PROMOTIONS

16.1   Posting of Vacancies

       16.1.1 Vacancy shall mean all newly created, additional teaching positions and all
              continuing teaching positions that have been vacated by reason of resignation,
              retirement, dismissal, death, reassignment, or transfer.

       16.1.2 All vacancies for the following school year will be posted according to the
              following schedule. Exception: Vacancies that are filled by administrative transfer
              will not be posted.

       16.1.3 Posting of Elementary Vacancies

              16.1.3.1 The day after the annual surplus meeting, the Human Resources office will
                       publish online the first listing of known elementary vacancies that will
                       occur for the following school year. Subsequent vacancies may be posted
                       on a daily basis.

       16.1.4 Posting of Secondary Vacancies

              16.1.4.1 The day after the annual surplus meeting, the Human Resources office will
                       publish online the first listing of known secondary vacancies that will
                       occur for the following school year. Subsequent vacancies may be posted
                       on a daily basis. (Exception: High School head coaching positions for the
                       following school year may be posted as soon as the vacancy is declared.)

       16.1.5 Posting of Positions for New Schools

              16.1.5.1 Staffing of positions in new schools may be exempted from the above
                       timelines and posted as vacancies on an earlier date (to be determined by
                       the District) after consultation with the Association.

16.2   Application for Transfer to a Posted Position

       16.2.1 The day after the annual surplus meeting, all teachers in the District shall be eligible
              to apply for transfer to any specific position in another school that has been posted
              as a vacancy for the following school year, including those positions filled on a
              temporary basis after the first day of the second semester.




                                                 26
       16.2.2 Teachers desiring a transfer to a posted position must apply online for the specific
              posted position, or positions, for which the teacher wishes to apply. After
              completing an online transfer request, a confirmation number is provided. Transfer
              applications will be accepted until 30 calendar days prior to the start of the new
              contract year.

       16.2.3 The application deadline date shall be the fifth working day following publication
              and posting of the vacancy.

16.3   Procedures for Choosing Among Applicants for a Posted Position

       16.3.1 In filling non-promotional vacancies occurring within the teaching staff of the
              District, principals shall consider the program and staffing needs of the school and
              the relative qualifications of the applicants for the available position.

       16.3.2 Selection among applicants to fill posted vacancies shall be based on the relative
              qualifications of the applicants, with the primary objective of selecting the applicant
              best qualified to fill the vacancy.

       16.3.3 If the principal determines that two or more applicants are equally well qualified for
              a vacant position, first consideration shall be given to applicants who are currently
              employed by the District.

       16.3.4 If a choice must be made among applicants currently employed by the District who
              have been determined by the principal to be equally well qualified for the position,
              the teacher with the greatest length of continuous and current contract service in the
              District shall be appointed.

       16.3.5 No assignments of new teachers shall be made until the applications of teachers
              declared surplus and teachers requesting transfer have been considered.

       16.3.6 Each approved transferee and principal involved shall be notified of the transfer
              within ten days after the application deadline. In the event a transfer is not
              approved, the applicant may request written notice of the reason. If a teacher has
              questions about their transfer, the teacher may request an interview with the director
              of Human Resources and an appointment will be set.

16.4   Procedures for Determining Which Teachers Will Be Declared Surplus

       16.4.1 Transfers of surplus teachers may become necessary at the end of the school year
              because of enrollment decline, school closure, or change in school program.




                                                 27
       16.4.2 When enrollment decline, school closure, or change in school program makes
              necessary the transfer of surplus teachers, a call for volunteers shall be made. If
              there are no volunteers, decisions as to which teachers will be declared surplus shall
              be based on the program and staffing needs of the school and the relative
              qualifications of the teaching staff to fill the available positions.

       16.4.3 If a choice must be made between two or more teachers determined by the principal
              to be equally well qualified for an available position, the teacher with the least
              seniority in the District will be declared surplus.

       16.4.4 No teacher will be declared surplus without an explanation of the reasons for such
              action. Before recommending that a teacher be declared surplus, the principal will
              confer with the teacher involved to discuss the proposed action and the reasons for
              such action.

       16.4.5 The transferring of surplus teachers because of enrollment decline, school closure,
              or change in school program will be recommended by the principal and the
              appropriate School Leadership and Improvement Director.

16.5   Procedures for Placement of Surplus Teachers

       16.5.1 Written notice of surplus status will be given, when possible, by March 15 for
              elementary teachers and by April 1 for secondary teachers.

       16.5.2 Surplus teachers, who qualify for available positions, shall be placed before any
              applicants new to Granite School District are considered.

       16.5.3 After a surplus teacher is placed, that teacher has the opportunity to apply for any
              specific position in another school that is posted as a vacancy.

16.6   Administrative Transfer of Teachers

       16.6.1 Circumstances may sometimes require that a teacher be transferred from one
              location or assignment to another.

       16.6.2 Before recommending a teacher transfer, the principal and/or the appropriate School
              Leadership and Improvement Director will meet with the teacher involved to
              discuss the proposed transfer and the reasons thereof.

       16.6.3 No administrative transfer will be made arbitrarily, capriciously, or without a
              written explanation of the reason for the transfer.

       16.6.4 The criteria specified in 16.4.2 and 16.4.3 will apply to administrative transfers
              during the school year because of enrollment decline, school closure, or change in
                                                 28
              school program.

       16.6.5 If the teacher objects to the proposed transfer, the teacher may request a meeting
              with the appropriate School Leadership and Improvement Director to discuss the
              matter.

       16.6.6 Administrative transfers will be recommended by the principal and/or the
              appropriate School Leadership and Improvement Director and will take effect only
              after approval by the appropriate Assistant Superintendent.

       16.6.7 Human Resources, in consultation with the Executive Director of the Association,
              may administratively transfer teachers on a .5 FTE in two locations to a single
              location 1.0 FTE.

16.7   Promotions

       16.7.1 In filling promotional vacancies, preference shall be given to personnel already
              employed in the District providing other qualifications are substantially equal. A
              promotion is defined as a position that comes with additional days beyond the base
              contract.

       16.7.2 Applicants for such promotions shall be notified of the final decision in writing.



                                               ARTICLE 17

                    ADULT AND COMMUNITY SCHOOL EMPLOYMENT

17.1   No certificated position for credit classes in the Adult and Community Schools shall be
       filled by a teacher not employed by the District during the regular school term if there is a
       qualified applicant for such position who is employed by the District during the regular
       term.

17.2   In filling such positions, consideration will be given to a teacher's area of competence,
       major and minor fields of study, quality of performance, and ability to relate well with
       students.

17.3   Teachers employed in adult and community school credit classes shall be paid an hourly
       rate, according to their current contract salary as a regular teacher in the District, to a
       maximum hourly rate based on step six of the teacher’s salary lane.




                                                 29
                                           ARTICLE 18

                                      LEAVES OF ABSENCE

Note: Effective 1/1/93, the majority of currently employed teachers will convert to a new
      accumulative sick leave program, which includes the option of both short and long-term
      disability. All teachers hired after 1/1/93 will be placed on the new sick leave program.
      With the exception of l8.1.2.1, all of the following provisions shall apply as far as there is
      available accumulated sick leave for the teacher to use. Further details of this program are
      available from the Association or Human Resources Office.

18.1   Sick Leave. Sick leave is to be taken only for illness, accident, or recuperation from the
       same. It is the professional responsibility of every professional person to use this sick leave
       only for the purpose intended. Any proven misuse thereof would be considered unethical,
       unprofessional, and in violation of the teacher's contract. Sick leave will be granted
       according to the following schedule.

       18.1.1 Sick Leave for Provisional Teachers

               18.1.1.1 Ten days of sick leave will be granted annually with full pay, cumulative
                        to thirty teaching days. Sick leave is allocated after a teacher works at least
                        one scheduled contract day in the current school year.

               18.1.1.2 When the effective date of appointment of a teacher is before the
                        beginning of the second semester of any school year, the teacher will be
                        given credit for the full annual sick leave allowance.

               18.1.1.3 When the effective date of appointment of a teacher is on or after the
                        beginning of the second semester, the teacher will be given credit for five
                        days’ sick leave allowance.

               18.1.1.4 One additional day of annual sick leave will be added for each additional
                        contract month served beyond the regular school year.

               18.1.1.5 Verification of any disability may be required any time a teacher is absent
                        from work. If disability verification has not been required sooner, the
                        teacher shall furnish such verification on or before the twenty-first
                        calendar day of disability using the District's "Diagnosis and Functional
                        Limitations" form. The form must be submitted to the District Human
                        Resources office.

               18.1.1.6 A teacher whose personal illness extends beyond the teacher’s
                        accumulated sick leave may be granted a leave of absence of up to one
                        year without pay or increment. Request for such leave must be
                        accompanied by a “Diagnosis and Functional Limitations” form from a
                                                  30
                licensed medical provider that such leave is necessary.

       18.1.1.7 Upon return from such leave, a teacher will be assigned to the same
                position if available, or, if not, to a substantially similar position.

18.1.2 Sick Leave for Regular Contract Teachers

Note: 18.1.2.1 Only applies to teachers on contract with the District prior to 1/1/93 who
      elected to remain on the old sick leave program. Those teachers do not have an
      accumulated sick leave program or the option of short or long-term disability
      insurance through the District.

       18.1.2.1 Extended sick leave with full pay up to a maximum of 180 school days for
                any one illness, not limited to any one contract year, will be granted
                teachers.

       18.1.2.2 Ten days of sick leave will be granted annually with full pay. Sick leave is
                allocated after a teacher works at least one scheduled contract day in the
                current school year.

       18.1.2.3 One additional day of annual sick leave will be added for each additional
                contract month served beyond the regular school year.

       18.1.2.4 The provisions of 18.1.1.5, 18.1.1.6, and 18.1.1.7 above shall apply.

18.1.3 Special Use of Sick Leave.

       18.1.3.1 Special use of sick leave will be reviewed by the principal, the Benefits
                Department, and granted by the appropriate Assistant Superintendent, in
                the event of serious illness of a member of the immediate family, or of any
                other person who is a member of the same household as the teacher.
                Denial of special use of sick leave can be appealed to the Superintendent.

       18.1.3.2 The immediate family is defined as husband, wife, father, father- in-law,
                stepfather, mother, mother-in-law, stepmother, daughter, daughter-in-law,
                stepdaughter, son, son-in-law, stepson, brother, brother-in-law, step
                brother, sister, sister-in-law, step sister, aunt, uncle, grandchildren,
                grandchildren-in-law, step grandchildren, grandparent, grandparent–in-
                law, step grandparent, or any other person who is a permanent member of
                the same household as the employee.

       18.1.3.3 It is not the intent that sick leave granted under this provision be used for
                extended convalescent care.

       18.1.3.4 Verification may be required for any family illness for which special use
                of sick leave is requested. After three days of absence for family illness in
                                          31
                        any one school year, the teacher shall furnish verification of any family
                        illness for which special use of sick leave is requested.

              18.1.3.5 After ten days of absence for family illness in any one school year, the
                       teacher involved shall pay the cost of substitutes for any further use of
                       special sick leave that is granted, by an Assistant Superintendent, for
                       family illness. (The teacher shall be charged the current daily Substitute B
                       rate.)

              18.1.3.6 Up to five (5) days of special use of sick leave will be granted by the
                       principal in the event of a death in the immediate family as defined above.
                       Bereavement days can be taken within a two-week window from the time
                       of the death.

18.2   Personal Leave

       18.2.1 Teachers are allocated four (4) personal leave days each contract year. Personal
              leave can be taken for any reason, at the discretion of the teacher. Teachers who
              take no personal leave in a contract year will receive an amount equal to three times
              the current Substitute B rate. Teachers who take one personal leave day in a
              contract year will receive an amount equal to two times the current Substitute B
              rate. Teachers who take two personal leave days in a contract year will receive an
              amount equal to the current Substitute B rate. Teachers who take three or four
              personal days in a contract year will receive no additional amount.

       18.2.2 A minimum of one day (24 hours) notice must be given to the principal before
              taking personal leave, except in cases of emergency. (See Appendix F.)

       18.2.3 Personal Leave should not be taken the day before or after a school holiday
              (weekdays when school is not in session for students) or during the first or last week
              of school. Exceptions must have the prior approval of the school principal.

       18.2.4 Limitations will be placed by the principal on the number who can take Personal
              Leave on any given day at that school. Generally, only one or two Personal Leave
              days per school, per school day can be approved. Such limits are necessary based on
              the availability of substitutes. Personal Leave will not be granted in connection with
              any form of job action or work stoppage.

18.3   Emergency Leave

       18.3.1 In emergency situations, teachers will be allowed to reimburse the district the cost
              of the substitute. The Human Resources Director will work with the Association on
              what constitutes an emergency.

              Emergency Leave situations are unforeseen severe circumstances beyond the
                                                32
              employee’s control where the employee can show proof they had intended to be at
              work. Documentation should be provided within three working days from the time
              the employee reports back to work. A maximum of three days would be allowed
              where an employee would be allowed to pay the cost of the substitute.

              Out-of-town natural disasters, grounding of airlines, fire evacuations, will qualify
              for emergency leave. Routine unforeseen circumstances like car accidents, water
              heater breaks, and snowstorms will not be granted.

18.4   Sabbatical Leave

       18.4.1 Sabbatical leaves of absence are granted for professional improvement upon
              recommendation by the Superintendent and the approval of the Board, subject to the
              following conditions:

              18.4.1.1 Requests for sabbatical leaves of absence must be received by the
                       Superintendent in writing in such form as may be required not later than
                       February 15 of the year in which the sabbatical is requested.

              18.4.1.2 Teachers will be notified by March 15 as to the disposition of the request.

       18.4.2 The teacher must have completed six consecutive full school years in active service
              as a regularly employed staff member in the District in order to be eligible to
              request a sabbatical leave.

       18.4.3 Teachers on sabbatical leaves of absence will be paid at one-half of their annual
              salary rate. Upon return, the teacher shall be placed on the next step on the salary
              schedule.

              18.4.3.1 Payment will be made twice per month on the 15th and the last district
                       working day per month. The first payment will be made on the 15th of the
                       first month of effective sabbatical leave.

       18.4.4 A sabbatical leave of absence may be extended as a leave of absence without pay or
              increment for an additional year.

       18.4.5 The teacher shall sign a written agreement with the Board agreeing to return to
              employment with the District for two full years following the leave, or to reimburse
              the District for the total amount received during the leave unless circumstances
              merit that the Board make an adjustment.

       18.4.6 The teacher returning from a sabbatical leave of absence for professional
              improvement shall submit to the Superintendent a report containing transcripts of all
              college and university study while on leave, a description of travel, and other items
              of information pertinent to an evaluation of the teacher's program.

                                                 33
       18.4.7 Insurance benefits will be provided for teachers on sabbatical leave.

       18.4.8 Insurance benefits will not be provided for teachers whose sabbatical leave has been
              extended, without pay, beyond the one-year leave.

       18.4.9 The number of teachers to be granted a sabbatical leave during a school year shall
              not exceed one-half of one percent of the total certificated staff.

       18.4.10 Teachers returning from a sabbatical leave will be entitled at the end of the leave to
              the position they left, or to a position comparable to the one vacated. The teacher
              hired as a replacement shall be notified in writing at the time of appointment that
              the appointment is for the length of the regular teacher's leave only.

18.5   Leaves of Absence Without Pay.

       18.5.1 Teachers in the District are eligible to apply for a leave of absence without pay.

       18.5.2 One-year leaves of absence without pay shall be granted for reasons of newborn
              care or adoption.

       18.5.3 A limited number of leaves of absence without pay for other reasons (including but
              not limited to health problems and graduate work at a university) may also be
              granted by the Superintendent after consultation with the principal and with
              approval of the Board.

       18.5.4 Teachers shall submit a written request stating the purpose of the leave, the length
              of the leave, and the beginning and termination dates.

       18.5.5 One-year leaves of absence without pay may not exceed two full semesters.
              Insurance benefits will not be provided for teachers on a one-year leave of absence
              without pay.

       18.5.6 Teachers returning from a leave of absence without pay will be entitled at the end of
              the leave to the position they left, or to a position comparable to the one vacated.
              The teacher hired as a replacement shall be notified in writing at the time of
              appointment that the appointment is for the length of the regular teacher's leave
              only.

       18.5.7 To facilitate staffing and assignments, teachers returning from a leave of absence
              without pay are entitled to return to work at the beginning of the semester (for
              secondary) or beginning of a school year (for elementary) which most closely
              follows the anniversary of the beginning of the leave. Teachers scheduled to return
              at the beginning of the first semester (secondary) or beginning of the school year
              (elementary) must notify the Human Resources office, in writing, of their intent to
              return no later than March 1. Teachers scheduled to return at the beginning of the

                                                 34
              second semester (secondary) must notify the Human Resources office of their intent
              to return in writing no later than November 1.

       18.5.8 Upon returning from a one-year leaves of absence without pay, the teacher will
              resume contract status as a contract teacher.

       18.5.9 15-Day Leave without Pay. Granite may grant a fifteen (15) day leave of absence
              without pay leave option. To take a 15-day leave of absence without pay, a teacher
              must complete the required application containing the signatures of the teacher,
              their immediate supervisor, and the applicable assistant superintendent. This type
              of leave cannot be taken retroactively and begins once signed and approved by an
              assistant superintendent.

18.6   Military Leave, Jury Duty Leave, and Public Office Leave. All contract teachers will be
       eligible for Military Leave, Jury Duty Leave, and Public Office Leave as specified in Board
       Policy.

18.7   Association Leave.

       18.7.1 The Association will be allowed up to 120 days of Association Leave for teachers to
              be released from normal duties at the request of the Association for the purposes of
              performing those duties associated with representation of the bargaining unit and
              promoting educational benefits for students, teachers, administrators, Granite
              Education Association, and the Granite School District Board of Education.

       18.7.2 All released time for duties associated with GEA, UEA, and NEA shall be
              considered Association Leave, except as specifically provided in the following
              paragraph.


       18.7.3 Released time for the following, when scheduled during working hours, shall be
              provided without loss of pay, and shall not be considered Association Leave:

                     ·Negotiations meetings with district representatives.
                     ·Grievance meetings with district representatives.
                     ·Other joint meetings with district representatives.

       18.7.4 Up to 60 of the 120 days of Association Leave may be recognized by the District as
              having direct benefit to the students and instructional programs of Granite School
              District. Such leave days shall be provided without loss of pay and without
              Association payment for substitutes. The Association will pay the substitute costs
              for all other Association Leave days and the District will allow the employee to be
              released without loss of pay.

       18.7.5 Requests for Association Leave, and a summary statement relative to the outcome

                                               35
              of the leave (benefit to Granite School District and/or the Association), must be
              submitted by the executive director of the Association in writing, on District
              approved forms, to the Superintendent or designee. The executive director of the
              Association will determine whether the leave requires the payment of substitute
              costs. An evaluation of all Association Leave days relative to the purpose and
              outcome of such leaves will be conducted by the Association and District
              administration prior to July 15 of each year.

18.8   Adoption Leave. Employees who legally adopt a child who has not previously been a
       member of the immediate household may take up to ten days of accumulated sick leave.
       The adopted child must be under the age of 18. Any leave to be considered adoption leave
       must be taken within 30 calendar days of the day on which the child is placed in the home
       of the adopting parent(s).



                                          ARTICLE 19

          SUSPENSION, TERMINATION AND NON-RENEWAL OF CONTRACT

19.1   Teachers may be suspended or dismissed for cause under the provisions of the Utah
       Administrative Code 53G.

19.2   Cause. A list of causes considered by the Board to be possible grounds for suspension or
       dismissal is included in the official Policies, Rules, and Regulations of the Board.

19.3   Suspension. The Superintendent, or the Superintendent’s designee, may suspend a teacher
       with or without salary, whenever, in the Superintendent’s professional judgment, it is in the
       best interest of the District to take such action. Notice of suspension shall be given in
       writing, including a statement of the reasons thereof. Suspended teachers shall have the
       right to an informal hearing pursuant to Article 6.4 if the hearing is requested within 15
       working days of receiving a letter of suspension.

19.4   Termination of Contract during Contract Term.

       19.4.1 Preliminary Notice: When the District intends to terminate a teacher's contract
              during the contract term for unsatisfactory performance, the District will inform the
              teacher of the fact that continued employment is in question and the reasons thereof
              at least thirty days before issuing the termination notice. The teacher will be given
              an opportunity to correct any deficiencies that precipitated possible termination of
              contract.

       19.4.2 Termination Notice: When the District intends to terminate a teacher's contract
              during the contract term for unsatisfactory performance, or for cause, the teacher
              may request an informal conference with the appropriate Assistant Superintendent
                                                36
              to discuss the matter. If termination of the teacher’s contract is the final
              determination of the District, it will give prior written notice of such intent served
              by personal delivery or by certified mail addressed to the teacher's last known
              address. Such termination notice will state the reasons and causes for termination
              and will advise the teacher of their rights to appeal. Termination notices will be
              delivered or mailed at least thirty days prior to the proposed date of termination.

19.5   Non-renewal of Regular Contract Teachers.

       19.5.1 Preliminary Notice: When the District intends not to renew a teacher's contract, the
              District will inform the teacher of the fact that continued employment is in question
              and of the reasons thereof at least one month before issuing the non-renewal notice.
              The teacher will be given an opportunity to correct any deficiencies which
              precipitated possible non-renewal.

       19.5.2 Non-renewal Notice: When the District intends not to renew a teacher's contract,
              the District will give prior written notice of such intent served by personal delivery
              or by certified mail addressed to the teacher's last known address. Such non-renewal
              notice will be dated and contain a clear and concise statement that the teacher's
              contract will not be renewed, will state the reasons and causes for such action, and
              will advise the teacher that they may request an informal conference with the
              appropriate Assistant Superintendent to discuss the matter. Non-renewal notices will
              be delivered or mailed at least 60 calendar days prior to the end of the contract term
              of the individual teacher involved.

       19.5.3 Failure to Give Timely Notice: In the absence of timely notice, contract teachers
              will be deemed to be re-employed for the succeeding contract term with a salary
              based upon the applicable teacher salary schedule.

19.6   Informal Hearing for Provisional or Career Contract Teachers

       19.6.1 After receiving a non-renewal notice, provisional or career contract teachers may
              file a written request in the division Assistant Superintendent's office for an
              informal hearing pursuant to Article 6.4 to review the proposed dismissal. If the
              teacher does not request an informal hearing within 15 calendar days after receiving
              the termination or non-renewal notice, the teacher’s employment shall end on the
              date specified in the notice.

       19.6.2 If the division Assistant Superintendent's written determination is to dismiss the
              teacher, it will specify the effective date of dismissal, which will in no event be
              sooner than the originally proposed date, or the tenth day following the date of
              determination, whichever is later. The decision of the division Assistant
              Superintendent will be binding upon all parties, provided the decision does not
              exceed district authority as established in the law.
                                                 37
              Note: Provisional contract teachers have the same right of a hearing under 19.7 as a
              regular contract teacher for a termination of a contract for cause during the contract
              term.

19.7   Formal Hearing for Regular Contract Teachers

       19.7.1 After receiving a termination notice, or a non-renewal notice, regular contract
              teachers and specially funded program teachers who have completed their
              provisional period and who are being released for reasons other than curtailment or
              discontinuance of funds, may file a written request in the Superintendent’s office for
              a formal hearing to review the proposed dismissal. If the teacher does not request a
              formal hearing within 15 calendar days after receiving the termination or non-
              renewal notice, the teacher’s employment shall end on the date specified in the
              notice.

       19.7.2 Representatives of the Superintendent and the Association will agree upon an
              impartial third-party hearing examiner from outside the District within ten calendar
              days after receipt of the formal hearing request.

       19.7.3 At the hearing, the parties shall have the right to be accompanied, advised or
              represented by a person of their own choosing except that they may not be
              represented by an advocate, an officer, or a member of any teacher organization
              other than the Association. All parties may be represented by counsel, produce
              witnesses, hear all testimony of the other party, cross-examine witnesses, and
              examine all documentary evidence.

       19.7.4 Within twenty working days following the hearing, the hearing examiner will
              submit a recommended solution to the Board, with copies to the teacher, the
              Superintendent, district representative, and to the Association. The recommendation
              of the hearing examiner will be advisory only. The Board will make a final
              disposition of the case within forty-five calendar days after receiving the hearing
              examiner's recommendation. The decision of the Board will be submitted in writing
              to all parties, and will be binding upon all parties, provided the decision does not
              exceed Board authority as established in the law.

19.8   General Provisions

       19.8.1 Time Limits: The above time limits regarding hearing dates and decisions may be
              extended by mutual agreement.

       19.8.2 Costs: The costs of the hearing examiner and of preparing a hearing record (if any)
              will be shared equally by the Board and the Association. If the employee is not a
              member of the Association, the cost of the hearing examiner and of preparing a
              hearing record will be shared equally by the Board and the employee.

                                                38
      19.8.3 Reinstatement of Lost Pay: If it is determined that a suspension without pay, or
             the length thereof was unjustified, the final decision will include appropriate
             reinstatement of lost pay to the teacher involved.

      19.8.4 Personnel Records: If the final determination is not to dismiss a teacher, record of
             the District's attempt to dismiss the teacher will not become part of the teacher's
             personnel file. Material will be removed from the teacher's file when a teacher's
             claim that it is inaccurate has been sustained in dismissal proceedings.

      19.8.5 Court Appeals: Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of a teacher to
             appeal the District's decision to an appropriate court of law.

19.9 Reduction in Force

      19.9.1 The reduction in force process will not apply and need not be followed unless there
             is a district-wide reduction in force. A district-wide reduction in force occurs when
             the District is unable to place teachers at the end of the surplus process prior to the
             beginning of a new contract year. After the surplus process is complete, the
             Superintendent may release as many teachers as necessary.

      19.9.2 A meeting between the Superintendent, or designee, and a representative of the
             Association will be set at least 10 days prior to any final action by the District to
             reduce teachers as the result of a district-wide reduction in force.

      19.9.3 All unplaced teachers will be reviewed by the number of their respective
             endorsements and certifications according to the staffing needs of the District.
             Staffing needs may include but are not limited to the following: endorsements,
             certifications, pattern of declining enrollments in subject area, endorsements in core
             academic areas, ESL and gifted endorsements, extracurricular coaching
             endorsements and certifications, eMINTS certifications, and those who are fluent in
             a language needed within a school site. Any teacher who has received a current
             (within the existing school year) written notice of suspension will not be eligible to
             displace another teacher.

      19.9.4 If a choice must be made between two or more teachers determined by the District
             to be equally well qualified for the position, the teacher with the most advanced
             degree and lane placement according to the teacher salary schedule will be retained.

      19.9.5 Teachers released through this process, who are not on active corrective discipline
             as found within their district personnel file, shall be given the first right of interview
             for positions for which they are qualified that become available during the six
             months following their release. Notification of the available position shall be made
             by a certified letter to the last known address of the former employee. The offer of
             interview shall advise the person that they have seven days after the postmarked

                                                 39
              date of the letter to accept or reject the offer of interview. If rehired under this
              section, teachers will be placed on the step they would have received if they had not
              been released. Offers not accepted or responded to by the seventh day are deemed
              rejected.

19.10 Voluntary Termination of Employment (Resignation)

       19.10.1 The Board and a teacher may mutually agree to terminate the teacher's contract at
               any time.

       19.10.2 A teacher may retire from employment at the end of the first semester in January
               by submitting written notice to Human Resources no later than October 1 or may
               retire on the last day of the school year by submitting written notice to Human
               Resources no later than February 1.

       19.10.3 A teacher may terminate their contract upon thirty days written notice to the
               director of Human Resources.

       19.10.4 Liquidated damages in the amount of $1,000 will be levied against a teacher who
               fails to give the above required notice.



                                          ARTICLE 20

                                   INSURANCE PROGRAMS

20.1   Eligibility. All teachers under contract shall be eligible for the group insurance programs
       provided by the board.



       20.1.1 Coverage. Insurance coverage (medical, life, etc.) for eligible contract teachers
              cannot begin until the Benefits Personnel Office receives completed online
              enrollment confirmation and, if necessary, supporting documentation (marriage
              certificate, dependent birth certificate, etc.). Teachers who complete the online
              insurance enrollment within their first 30 days of contract employment will have
              insurance for individual selected coverage. Insurance benefits will begin the first
              day of the month following the contract start date. Teachers must elect to receive or
              waive insurance coverage annually.

              Teachers who enroll in voluntary life insurance, increase voluntary life insurance or
              disability coverage after their first 30 days of contract employment must complete
              an evidence of insurability form. The evidence of insurability form must be
              approved by the carrier before coverage is effective.

                                                40
              Any life changing events affecting insurance coverage (marriage, divorce, death,
              birth, etc.) must be reported to the Benefits Office within 30 calendar days of the
              event to ensure coverage.

       20.1.2 Medical insurance premiums paid by the employee reflect a percentage of the total
              of medical insurance and are recalibrated annually.

       20.1.3 Ending Date of Coverage. Each insured teacher who terminates employment with
              the District shall have the benefit of such group insurance during the summer period
              and until August 31 for the employee group to which the teacher belonged, provided
              the teacher shall have completed the employment contract for the school year just
              ended; otherwise, coverage shall end at midnight on the date specified in the
              insurance policy for teachers who terminate prior to the end of the school year.

20.2   Dual Medical Coverage. If a teacher who is eligible for coverage under the District’s
       group medical plan is also eligible as the spouse of another covered employee, the
       coverages will supplement one another, so that benefit payments for such individuals with
       dual coverage will be made up to 100 percent of the eligible charge provided that each
       employee pays the full contribution amount associated with the coverage sought and one
       employee pays the employee or employee plus dependent(s) amount (e.g. two employees
       only, one pays employee plus spouse and the other pays employee only contribution; or two
       employees and family, one employee pays employee plus spouse and family and the other
       pays employee plus family). The employees must be members of the same medical
       insurance plan.

20.3   Shared Premium for Contract Teachers Working Less than Full-time (1.0 FTE).
       Contract teachers working less than full-time will receive full coverage under the District's
       group medical and non-contributory life insurance programs if they pay their proportional
       share of premium costs by authorized payroll deduction. The teacher’s proportional share
       equals 1.0 minus the teacher’s FTE. The Board will pay the percentage of premiums equal
       to the teacher’s FTE. Such teachers who elect not to pay their share of the premiums will
       not be covered.

20.4   Insurance Committee. Association leaders and/or Association appointees will meet
       regularly with the District to discuss, study, and make recommendations regarding the
       substance, implementation, and funding of insurance programs.




                                                 41
                                           ARTICLE 21

                                 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION

21.1   The Board will provide Workers’ Compensation insurance for teachers as required by state
       law.



                                           ARTICLE 22

                                       DUES DEDUCTION

22.1   The Board agrees to deduct from each teacher's salary, as authorized by that individual, an
       amount of money to be used to pay the dues to the appropriate association.

22.2   Dues deductions shall be made uniformly on each monthly payroll. Any requests to add,
       delete or change dues deductions, which are received by the Payroll Office after the 10th
       day of any month, will not be honored until the following month. Requests to add, change,
       or cancel dues deductions must be submitted on forms provided by the Association and
       available at the Association offices.

22.3   The Association agrees to hold the Board harmless from any action growing out of these
       deductions and commenced by any teacher against the Board or the District. The
       Association assumes full responsibility for the disposition of the funds so deducted once
       they have been turned over to the Association.



                                           ARTICLE 23

                              DISTRICT RETIREMENT BENEFIT

23.1   Current teachers who have at least ten (10) contract years in Granite School District and
       retire under the provisions of the Utah State Retirement Act may be eligible for the
       following additional district retirement benefits, as outlined in the provisions and timelines
       of Administrative Memorandum 56: Early Retirement Incentive Program for Teachers.
       Teachers wishing to participate in the early retirement incentive program shall apply by
       submitting the approved Human Resources forms to the Associate Director of Human
       Resources over retirement no later than:

              a. February 1 to retire at the end of the school year
              b. October 1 to retire at the end of the first semester in January

       23.1.1 The District Retirement Benefit – Any eligible regular contract teacher who
              retires under the provisions and timelines of Memorandum 56 will receive the
              District Retirement Benefit, which is a one-time stipend equal to one-half of one

                                                 42
       percent (0.005) of the final contract base salary times the number of years of service
       in the district in a contract position. This one-time stipend will be deposited into a
       403(b) Special Pay Plan within 30 days of the last paycheck date. Stipends for
       individuals who retire within three months after the start of a new contract year will
       be based on the contract base salary from the prior year.



23.1.2 Early Retirement Stipend - Any eligible regular contract teacher who retires under
       the provisions and timelines of Memorandum 56 will be given 12 percent of their
       final base contract salary each year for five consecutive years or until eligible for
       full Social Security benefits (by July 1 of that year), whichever occurs first. Early
       retirement stipends will cease upon the death of the retiree. The payments will be
       deposited into a 403(b) Special Pay Plan beginning the first September 15 following
       the last date of contract employment (termination date) and each September 15
       thereafter until the payments are completed as described above.



23.1.3 Teachers who retire early under the provisions and timelines of the Early
       Retirement Incentive Program for Teachers may continue to enroll in the District’s
       group medical and dental programs for five consecutive years following the last
       date of contractual insurance coverage or until they are eligible for Medicare,
       whichever occurs first. Teachers may participate in the district-sponsored life
       insurance program for five consecutive years following the last date of contractual
       insurance coverage or until eligible for full Social Security benefits, whichever
       occurs first. Life insurance and medical benefits will be paid according to the life
       insurance and medical policies in effect at the time expenses or death occur. The
       amount of life insurance coverage will be based on the retiree’s contract base salary
       during the retiree’s final year of contract service up to a maximum amount of
       $100,000. Any ongoing changes in premium or benefits affecting regular contract
       employees will also apply to retirees. Medical and dental coverage includes the
       retiree’s previously enrolled eligible spouse and dependents until they are no longer
       eligible.



23.1.4 Any teacher who has received a current (within the existing contract year) written
       notice of suspension, termination, or non-renewal of contract in accordance with
       Article 19, is not eligible to participate in the Early Retirement Incentive Program
       for Teachers, as outlined in the provisions of Administrative Memorandum 56.




                                         43
                                          ARTICLE 24

                    SCHOOL BUILDING PROFESSIONAL COMMITTEE



24.1   For encouragement of an acceptable relationship among the faculty and to assist in the
       efficient operation of the school, during the first month of the school year a committee of
       teachers shall be formed in each school building from the faculty of that building. The
       committee is an advisory, problem-solving body; therefore, the principal and Association
       faculty representative of each building shall be charged with the responsibility of
       organizing the School Building Professional Committee. All teachers within the school
       shall be eligible to vote for and hold elective positions on the committee, irrespective of
       membership in the Association. The members of the School Building Professional
       Committee shall select one member who will serve as the chairperson of the committee.
       Prior to the implementation of new policy initiated at the local school building level, the
       policy will be reviewed by the School Building Committee in consultation with the faculty.
       Even though administrative functions are the responsibility of the Board and its
       administrative staff, all due consideration should be given to the Committee
       recommendation.

       24.1.1 In schools having fewer than 30 teachers, the committee shall consist of three
              teachers: one member shall be elected by the faculty, one member shall be
              appointed by the principal, and one shall be the duly elected faculty representative.

       24.1.2 In schools having 30 teachers or more, the committee shall consist of five teachers:
              two members shall be elected by the faculty, two shall be appointed by the
              principal, and one shall be the duly elected faculty representative.

24.2   The chairperson of the School Building Professional Committee shall call and conduct all
       meetings of said committee. The Committee shall meet at least once a month.

24.3   The principal of each school shall meet as often as necessary with the School Building
       Professional Committee; however, it shall not be mandatory that the principal be in
       attendance at all meetings of said committee.

24.4   Additional meetings may be called at the request of the principal or the chairperson of the
       School Building Professional Committee.




                                                44
                                           ARTICLE 25

                          PROFESSIONAL PLANNING COMMITTEE

25.1   The Professional Planning Committee shall be composed of the following:

       · Members appointed by the Association (up to 10 appointees).

       · Members appointed by the Superintendent (up to 10 appointees).

25.2   The Committee shall function as an informal discussion group on matters of mutual
       concern to the teachers and the Board. Its purpose is to gather ideas, present reactions,
       express opinions, make recommendations, and to discuss school policy.

25.3   Meetings shall be held quarterly or a minimum of three (3) times during the school year
       according to a schedule determined by the Committee.




                                           ARTICLE 26

                           DISTRICT CURRICULUM COMMITTEES

26.1   Teachers, patrons, and administrators must be involved in curriculum initiatives, processes
       that address or evaluate curriculum issues, and district-wide adoptions of curriculum
       programs or textbooks.

26.2   Under the direction of the Educator Support and Development Division, all task forces,
       committees, and boards convened to address curriculum matters shall have representation
       of teachers, patrons, and administrators among their memberships.

26.3   The District will confer with the Association regarding membership in all task forces and
       committees that are formed to address curriculum matters.



                                           ARTICLE 27

                              CLASS SIZE REVIEW COMMITTEE

27.1   There shall be two class size review committees:

       -an elementary committee
       -a secondary committee

                                                 45
27.2   Each committee shall be composed of the following:

       Elementary: five members appointed by the Association.

       Secondary: five members appointed by the Association which shall include at least one
       junior high teacher, one junior high counselor, one senior high teacher, and one senior high
       counselor.

       Five members appointed by the Superintendent or the Superintendent’s designee to each
       committee.

27.3   The committees shall meet as needed to review, study, and make recommendations
       concerning class size issues.

27.4   The Association shall be given regular class size reports, according to the District schedule,
       detailing each school.



                                           ARTICLE 28

                           RELEASED TIME FOR GEA PRESIDENT

28.1   The GEA President will be released from teaching duties half-time to perform duties as
       GEA President.

28.2   The District will pay the full salary and fringe benefits of the Association president. The
       GEA will reimburse the District an amount equal to 50 percent of the president’s salary and
       benefits, less the 10 days allowed by statute.

28.3   The president shall receive normal step advancements on the salary schedule during their
       tenure as president.

28.4   The teacher returning from tenure as President will be entitled to the position the teacher
       left, or to a comparable position.



                                           ARTICLE 29

                                    LISTING OF TEACHERS

29.1   On or before August 15 of each year, the Human Resources Office will provide the
       Association with a listing of all new bargaining unit employees who have at that point been
       hired for the new school year. The listing will show the name, address, district email
       address, and assigned location of each employee.

29.2   On or before September 15 of each year, the Human Resources Office will provide the
                                                 46
       Association with a listing of all bargaining unit employees currently on the computer file.
       The listing will show the name, address, email address, and assigned location of each
       employee.



                                           ARTICLE 30

                                   BULLETIN BOARD SPACE

The Association shall have the right to post notices of Association matters on a bulletin board
space no smaller that twelve (12) square feet established for the Association's exclusive use in each
school.



                                           ARTICLE 31

                         DURATION AND EFFECT OF AGREEMENT

31.1   The specific provisions of this Agreement, and of other negotiated items, shall supersede
       any policy or directive of the Board which contradicts any such provision of this
       Agreement.

31.2   The provisions of this Agreement may be changed only through the written mutual consent
       of the Board and the Association.

31.3   All terms and conditions of employment not covered by this Agreement or by other
       negotiated items shall continue to be subject to the Board's direction and control.

31.4   This Agreement shall be effective July 1, 2020 and shall continue in effect through June 30,
       2023, except as provided in the following paragraph.

31.5   Negotiations shall commence April 1, 2021, April 1, 2022, and April 1, 2023 for the
       purpose of seeking mutually acceptable contract adjustments on the following items only:

       ·Salary
       ·Medical Insurance
       ·Any other negotiable items with mutual consent of both parties



                                           ARTICLE 32

                       BOARD POLICY, NUMBERED MEMORANDUM

32.1   The Association shall have the right to formally request the District to enforce Board Policy
       and numbered memorandum when there is a violation.
                                                 47
                          Appendices


The following appendices are included as reference materials only




                               48
APPENDIX A Salary Schedule




            49
                                                    APPENDIX B Grievance Form

                                                      Granite School District
                                                     GRIEVANCE FORM
                                                                                                                          Page One of Two
        This form is to be filed in accordance with Grievance Procedure, Article 6, in the Professional
        Agreement.
                                                                                                                        Principal or
Name and Address of Aggrieved Teacher or Teachers     Phone                       School            Grade or Subject    Immediate Supervisor




Date Grievance was first                                                Date of First Presentation
discussed with Principal                                                of this Written Grievance to
or Immediate Supervisor:                                                Principal or Immediate Supervisor:


I. Provisions of the Professional Agreement allegedly being violated, misinterpreted, or misapplied (please quote word for word):



II. Statement of Grievance:




III. Action Requested to Resolve Grievance:




        Name of person or persons (if any) designated as Representative(s): Signature of person filing this Grievance

        _______________________________________________________ _______________________________________

        _______________________________________________________




                                                                      50
                                                      APPENDIX B Grievance Form

                                                        Granite School District

                                                      GRIEVANCE FORM
                                                                                                                               Page Two of Two

     Aggrieved Teacher(s): _____________________________ Date of first Written Presentation: _________________


I. Decision of Principal or Immediate Supervisor (please attach a letter to the aggrieved teacher stating the reasons for this decision):




Date of
Decision: ____________________________                     Signature: ___________________________________________________________


Aggrieved Teacher’s Response:




         I hereby accept the above decision                                                   Response Date: ___________________________

         I hereby appeal the above decision to
          the Superintendent                               Signature: ____________________________________________________________




II. Decision of Superintendent (please attach a letter to the aggrieved teacher stating the reasons for this decision):




Date of Decision: ____________________________                     Signature: ____________________________________________________


Aggrieved Teacher’s Response:




         I hereby accept the above decision                                                   Response Date: ___________________________

         I hereby appeal the above decision to
          the Superintendent                               Signature: ___________________________________________________________


                                                                                                                     GSD Form 078/12B/12-99


                                                                         51
                                            APPENDIX C Application for Lane Advancement
                                                   Granite School District
                                                 2500 South State Street, Salt Lake City, Utah 84115

                                 Application for LANE ADVANCEMENT on the Salary Schedule
    *If application is received AFTER 30 days of the first day of employment, the Lane Advancement will become effective on the date the completed
    application form and all official documentation forms are received by the District Human Resources Office.

    Email address: ____________________________________________                                        Date: ___________________________

    Name: _____________________________________________                                                Employee ID:

    Address: _____________________________________________________________________ Zip Code: ___________________

    School/Department: ___________________________________ Teaching Assignment: ___________________________________


I am applying for:                                                       - FOR HUMAN RESOURCE OFFICE USE ONLY -

                                                                         College Credit: _______________________
   Lane B (Bachelor’s plus 20 semester hours)
   Lane C (Bachelor’s plus 40 semester hours)                           USBE Credit: ________________________
   Lane D (Master’s Degree)                                             Prior Approval Credit: _________________
   Lane E (Master’s plus 20 semester hours)
   Lane F (Master’s plus 40 semester hours)                             Total Credits: _______________________

   Lane G (Doctorate Degree)                                            Lane: ________________________________________________

                                                                         Effective Date: _________________________________________

                                                                         Approved: _____________________________________________

                                                                         Denied: ________________________________________________


    Utah License/Certification:
    ___________________________                            ___________________________________________________
    (Date of first License/Certification)                  (Type of License/Certification Issued)

    Out of State License/Certification:
    ___________________________                            ___________________________________________                       _______
    (Date of first License/Certification)                  (Type of License/Certification Issued)                            (State)

    BACCALUAREATE DEGREE:
    __________________________                    ___________________________________________
    Date Received                                          Institution Awarding Degree

    MASTER’S DEGREE:
    __________________________                    ___________________________________________
    Date Received                                          Institution Awarding Degree

    DOCTORATE DEGREE:
    __________________________                    ___________________________________________
    Date Received                                          Institution Awarding Degree

      For Human Resources Use Only
    ______________________________________
       CACTUS
    Applicant’s Signature
       HP – PO, SK, CO
    (Please read the guidelines on the reverse side.)
       PAYROLL
       Email
       Transcript sent to USBE


                                                                             52
APPENDIX D Prior Approval Form




              53
                                APPENDIX E Special Employment Contract

                              GRANITE SCHOOL DISTRICT
                           SPECIAL EMPLOYMENT CONTRACT
                              FOR NON-CAREER TEACHERS
This Special Employment Contract is made and entered into by and between Granite School District
(“District”) and Insert Name (“Employee”), subject to the ratification of the Board of Education of Granite
School District (“Board”).
The District agrees to hire Employee as a teacher at INSERT LOCATION on LANE STEP                   at a salary of
$_______.*
Employee’s position is classified as follows:

        1.      Provisional Contract Teacher (First Three Years). This is a contract for the period from
                to      only, with no right or expectation of continued employment.

        2.      Provisional Contract Teacher in Specially Funded Program (First Three Years). This is a
                contract for the period from    to       only, with no right or expectation of continued
                employment.

        3.      Specially Funded Program Teacher (After First Three Years): This is a contract for the
                period from         to       . If you are doing satisfactory work, you may expect continued
                employment in successive years, unless there is a curtailment or discontinuance of funds in
                your program. Any such curtailment or discontinuance of funds shall justify non-renewal.
                Teachers with this job classification are not career teachers entitled to a fair hearing under
                Utah law.

        4.      One Year Only Teacher. This is a contract for the period from            to        only, with no
                right or expectation of continued employment.

        5.      Rehire of former Granite Teacher More Than 6 years After Termination (Provisional).
                This is a provisional contract teacher contract for the period from to  only, with
                no right or expectation of continued employment.

*The above lane, step, and salary are based on the teacher salary schedule for the 20__-20__ school year and
will be adjusted, if necessary, subject to negotiations for the 20__-20__ school year. For teacher contracts that
begin after the first date of the Board-approved District calendar, the salary amount will be prorated based
upon the number of contract days remaining in the school year. Salary includes Professional Development
days which are subject to legislative and/or Board action.

Employee agrees to follow the rules, regulations, and policies of the Board and to perform Employee’s
assigned duties under the direction of the school principal and Superintendent or the Superintendent’s
designee.

Employee understands and agrees that this contract incorporates the terms of the Professional Agreement
between the Board of Education of Granite School District and the Granite Education Association
(“Professional Agreement”) to the extent provided for by the Professional Agreement.

Employee understands there is no obligation on the part of the District to renew this contract except as may be
provided in the Professional Agreement or as otherwise required by law.
                                                       54
Employee understands and agrees that, notwithstanding the execution of this contract by the undersigned
representative of the District, the following requirements are preconditions to its effectiveness. This contract
shall be automatically null and void and of no effect unless these requirements are satisfied prior to the
Employee’s start date:
    a. Employee must be authorized to legally work in the United States of America;
    b. Employee must pass all legally required background checks, and hold all necessary licensures legally
         required to be employed as a teacher;
    c. Action must be taken by the Board of Education to ratify the contract.

Employee understands and agrees that this contract may be immediately terminated by the District without
further recourse on the part of Employee if:
    a. At any point during the contract term Employee loses—or is unable to obtain renewal of—any
         necessary legal authorization required to work in the United States of America;
    b. At any point during the contract term Employee loses—or is unable to obtain renewal of—any legally
         required license necessary to act as a teacher or fails to obtain any required license and/or endorsement
         for the position for which Employee was hired.

All other causes for termination of this contract during its term shall be subject to the Professional Agreement,
District policy, and Utah law.

By signing below, the parties indicate their agreement with the terms of this contract, and their intent to be
bound by those terms.


 GRANITE SCHOOL DISTRICT


 _______________________________                                 _______________________________
 Human Resource Signature                                        Date


 EMPLOYEE

 _______________________________                                 _______________________________
 Employee Signature                                              Date




                                                        55
                                    APPENDIX F Teacher Application for Personal Leave


                                              Teacher Application For

                                             Personal Leave
                                             Original Copy to Principal or Supervisor Only.
                                             DO NOT send copies to Human Resources or Payroll.


Name of Employee:                                                                  SSN/Employee ID#:

School/Department:


Proposed Date(s) of Leave:


Teachers are allocated four (4) Personal Leave days per contract year at no cost to the teacher. Personal Leave can be taken for any reason at the
discretion of the teacher.

A teacher who uses no Personal Leave during a given contract year will receive an amount equal to three times the current daily Substitute B rate.
Teachers who take one Personal Leave day in a contract year will receive an amount equal to two times the current Substitute B rate. Teachers who take
two Personal Leave days in a contract year will receive an amount equal to the current Substitute B rate. Teachers who take three or four Personal Leave
days in a contract year will receive no additional amount.

A minimum of one (1) day notice (24 hours) must be given to the Principal or Supervisor before taking the Personal Leave, except in cases of
emergency.

Personal Leave should not be taken the day before or after a school holiday (weekdays when school is not in session for students) or during the first or
last week of school. Exceptions must have the prior approval of the school Principal or Supervisor.

Limitations will be placed by the Principal or Supervisor on the number of employees who can take Personal Leave on any given day at the school or
location. Generally, only one (1) or two (2) Personal Leave days per school or location, per school day, can be approved. Such limits are necessary
based on the availability of substitute teachers. Personal Leave will not be granted in connection with any form of job action or work stoppage.

NOTE:                  This negotiated benefit is to be used at the discretion of the teacher; however, Personal Leave shall not be used in order to work
another job at public expense.




Employee’s Signature                                                                                  Date




Principal/Supervisor’s Signature                                                           Date

Rev. 6-20-14




                                                                           56
                                        APPENDIX G
       School District and Utah Schools for the Deaf and Blind Employee Requirements



Utah Code 53G-11-5 School District and Utah Schools for the Deaf and Blind Employee
Requirements

Use this link to access the code: https://le.utah.gov/xcode/Title53G/Chapter11/53G-11-
P5.html?v=C53G-11-P5_2018012420180124




                                                 57
                                          INDEX

Item                                              Pages
  Adoptions                                        36
  Adult and Community School Employment            29
  Agreement:
    Adoption of                                    7
    Duration and Effect                            47
    Assignments                                    22
  Association:
    Definition                                     4
    Recognition                                    6
    Representation                                 6
    Association Leave                              35

 Bargaining Unit                                   6
 Board of Education:
   Definition                                      4
   Authority                                       5
   Policy                                          5
 Bulletin Board Space                              47

 Care of Newborn Child                             34
 Civil Liability Insurance                         23
 Civil or Criminal Proceedings                     23
 Committees:
    Class Size                                     45
    Curriculum                                     45
    Professional Planning                          45
    School Building                                44
 Community School Employment                       29
 Consultation Periods                              17
 Consultants for Negotiations                      7
 Continued Employment                              16
 Contract:
    Determination of                               17
    Nonrenewal of                                  37
    Relation to Agreement                          5
    Violation of                                   8
    Voluntary Termination of                       40
 Contract Teacher                                  3
 Credit on Salary Schedule                         13

 Days of Work                                      19
                                           58
Disability, Verification of           30
Discrimination                        5
Disruptive Student Behavior           23
District Retirement Benefit           43
Dual Medical Coverage                 41
Dues Deduction                        42
Duties, Performance of                16
Duty-Free Lunch                       19

Early Retirement Incentive            42
Elementary Planning Time              20-22
Elementary Vacancies                  26
Emergency Leave                       33
Employment, Periods of                13
Evaluation                            24

Facilities for Teachers               18
Forms:
   Grievance                          40-51
   Lane Change                        52
   Personal Leave                     56
   Prior Approval                     53
   Special Employment Contract        54-55
FTE Determination                     17

Grievance Procedure                   8

Hearings:
  Formal                              38
  Grievance                           9
  Informal                            12
  Termination & Nonrenewal            38

Impasse                               8
Increments                            13
Insurance:
   Liability                          23
   Life                               41
   Medical                            41
   Worker’s Compensation              42

Lane Advancement                      14
Leaves of Absence:
  Adoption                            36
  Association Leave                   35
  Care of Newborn Child               34
                                 59
   Death in Family                        32
   Emergency Leave                        33
   Family Illness                         31
   Jury Duty                              35
   Leave Without Pay                      34
   Military Leave                         35
   Personal Leave                         32
   Public Office Leave                    35
   Sabbatical Leave                       33
   Special Use of Sick Leave              31
Listing of Teachers                       46
Lunch Periods                             19
Lunch Supervision                         19

Mediation                                 8
Mileage Allowance & Reimbursements        15
Military Service, Credit for              14
Misuse of Sick Leave                      30

Negotiations                              7
New School Vacancy Postings               26

Parking Facilities                        18
Part-Time Contract                        17
Payment of Salaries                       15
Performance of Duties                     16
Personnel Files                           24
Posting of Vacancies                      26
Preamble                                  3
Preparation Periods                       17
Prior Approval                            14
Promotions                                29
Proration of Insurance Premium            41
Provisional Contract Teacher              3

Recall                                    40
Recognition of Association                6
Reduction in Force                        39
Regular Contract Teacher                  3
Released Time for GEA President           46
Resignation                               40
Restrooms                                 18

Salaries:
   Basis for Determining                  13
   Experience Credit                      13
                                     60
   Salary Schedule                       49
School Day                               19
Secondary Vacancies                      26
Special Employment Contract              54
Specially Funded Program Teachers        16
Substitutes, Regular Teachers as         20
Surplus Teachers                         27
Suspension                               36

Teacher, Definition of                   3
Teacher Evaluation                       24
Teacher Files                            24
Teaching Assignments                     22
Teaching Hours                           19
Teaching Load                            20
Telephones                               18
Temporary Teacher                        3
Termination of Contract                  37
Training, Salary Credit for              14
Transcripts of Credit                    14
Transfers
   Teacher Requests for Transfers        26
   Administrative Transfers              28

Vacancies                                26

Working Days                             18




                                    61
