                       BOARD OF SCHOOL COMMISSIONERS
                         INDIANAPOLIS PUBLIC SCHOOLS
                                    Indianapolis, Indiana


Agenda Item No.                                             Date: October 27, 2009

Related Pages (s):                                   Presented by: Eugene G. White, Ed.D
                                                                   Jane Hart-Ajabu

Key Result Area: KRA 6- Objective 2: Effectively recruit, hire, develop and retain
quality personnel to teach and serve children.


                          BOARD ACTION ITEM

Topic:         An amendment to Salary Resolution Number 5231 – Approval of the
               Agreement between the Board of School Commissioners and the
               Indianapolis Education Association for 2007-2008, 2008-2009, and 2009-
               2010.

Background Information:

         The Board of School Commissioners and the Indianapolis Education Association
         reached agreement on the master contract for the 2007-2008, 2008-2009, and
         2009-2010 School Years. Action occurred on August 25, 2009.

         Administrative Consideration:

         a)    Certain changes to language of the Contract regarding bereavement leave
               days, personal days and Reduction in Force (RIF).

         b)    Miscellaneous Pay Increases including Special Early Retirement
               Incentive, Curriculum Writing and Planning, National Board Certification,
               and Mater’s Degree Equivalency.

         c)    An increase in the Board’s contribution to insurance for 2008-2009
               according to the following chart. The increase is retroactive to January 1,
               2009, and will be paid in a lump sum.

                Coverage Options         2008-2009             2009-2010
                Employee                 $4,993                No Increase
                Employee/Child           $6,727                No Increase
                Employee/Spouse          $9,034                No Increase
                Family                   $9,658                No Increase

               Premium changes will take place the first pay in November 2009.
d)    A 1% salary increase will be paid retroactively to all retirees and teachers
      who where reduced in force (RIF’d) for 2007-2008.

e)    A salary increase of 2%, on the base, a 1% Bonus Payment, and a 1%
      one-time payment into 403b retirement accounts will occur for 2009-2010.


***Superintendent’s Recommendation:

I recommend that the Board of School Commissioners approve Resolution
Number 5231, the current Agreement with the Indiana Education Association to
include the language of the Contract and salary tables that reflect a 1% salary
increase for 2007-2008 and a 2% salary increase, on the base, for 2009-2010.
        AGREEMENT


         between the


BOARD OF SCHOOL COMMISSIONERS
  OF THE CITY OF INDIANAPOLIS


            and the


        INDIANAPOLIS
    EDUCATION ASSOCIATION



          2007-2008
          2008-2009
          2009-2010
                                              TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                                                                                        Page

PREAMBLE...................................................................................................................... 1

ARTICLE I                    RECOGNITION ............................................................................... 2

ARTICLE II                   PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS ............................................................... 3

ARTICLE III                  PROFESSIONAL AND PERSONAL LEAVES................................. 5

ARTICLE IV                   ILLNESS OR DISABILITY LEAVES ................................................ 7

ARTICLE V                    UNPAID LEAVES OF ABSENCE .................................................... 8

ARTICLE VI                   JOB SHARING .............................................................................. 12

ARTICLE VII                  RETIREMENT PAY AND BENEFITS ............................................ 13

ARTICLE VIII                 SUMMER SCHOOL, INTERSESSION AND ADULT EDUCATION 17

ARTICLE IX                   PROFESSIONAL COMPENSATION............................................. 18

ARTICLE X                    COACHING AND ATHLETIC ACTIVITIES ................................... 21

ARTICLE XI                   INSURANCE ................................................................................. 24

ARTICLE XII                  COMPENSATORY TIME .............................................................. 27

ARTICLE XIII                 EMERGENCY SCHOOL CLOSING .............................................. 28

ARTICLE XIV                  TEACHER'S PROTECTION.......................................................... 29

ARTICLE XV                   MISCELLANEOUS BENEFITS...................................................... 30

ARTICLE XVI                  HOURS ......................................................................................... 31

ARTICLE XVII                 REDUCTION IN FORCE ............................................................... 32

ARTICLE XVIII                EVALUATION................................................................................ 33

ARTICLE XIX                  GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURE ........................ 34

ARTICLE XX                   TERM OF AGREEMENT............................................................... 37

APPENDIX A                   SALARY SCHEDULES ................................................................. 38
APPENDIX B                   TEACHERS' PAY DATES ............................................................. 41
APPENDIX C   COMPANIES AUTHORIZED FOR PAYROLL
             DEDUCTIONS TAX-DEFERRED ANNUITIES/
             TAX- DEFERRED MUTUAL FUNDS.............................................. 42

APPENDIX D   TEACHER EVALUATION GUIDELINES AND TIMELINE............. .43

APPENDIX E   GRIEVANCE FORM...................................................................... .47




                                           ii
                                       PREAMBLE

             This Agreement is entered into, by and between the Board of School
Commissioners of the City of Indianapolis, Indiana, hereinafter called the "Board" or
"IPS," and the Indianapolis Education Association, hereinafter called the "Association" or
"IEA."
                                       ARTICLE I

                                     RECOGNITION

              Section 1: The Board recognizes the Association as the sole and
exclusive bargaining representative for all licensed contractual employees of the Board
including licensed teachers, social workers, guidance counselors, school psychologists,
nurses, speech and language pathologists, teachers on special assignment, lead
teachers, instructional coaches, and media specialists, hereinafter the Negotiating Unit,
except employees who are administrators, supervisors, confidential employees or
employees performing security work, including but not limited to employees in the
following classifications:

Superintendent, Chief of Staff, Executive Assistant to the Superintendent, Associate
Superintendent, Assistant Superintendent, Assistant to the Superintendent,
Administrative Assistant, Director of Instruction, Principal, Supervisor, Assistant
Principal, Consultant, Elementary and Personnel Coordinators, High School Evening
School Director, High School Media Director, Athletic Director, Dean, Assistant
Dean, Department Head, Chief of Human Resources, Academic Dean, Campus
Administrator and Assistant to Campus Administrator.

             Section 2: This recognition shall continue until successfully challenged by
members of the Negotiating Unit under provisions of Indiana Public Law 217, and rules
and regulations of the Indiana Education Employment Relations Board.

            Section 3: The term "teacher," when hereafter used, shall refer to every
employee in the above defined Negotiating Unit.




                                            -2-
                                        ARTICLE II

                                PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS

              Section 1: Any teacher who is a member of the Association, or who has
applied for membership, may sign and deliver to the Board, through the IEA office, a
form authorizing deduction of membership dues in the Association, the Indiana State
Teacher Association and the National Education Association. If such authorizations are
received by the Board not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the first payroll of the
school year, the deductions shall begin with said first paycheck and shall be divided
equally among the first twenty-six (26) paychecks received by the teacher in that school
year. Deductions of such membership dues from the paychecks of a teacher authorizing
such deductions after the above deadline for initiation on the first paycheck shall begin
no later than the second paycheck received by such teacher after IPS' receipt of the
authorization form. The total amount of dues to be deducted shall be divided as
evenly as possible among the number of paychecks to be received by the teacher
beginning with the first paycheck from which a deduction is made through the twenty-
sixth paycheck received by the teacher in the school year for which the authorization is
submitted. Deductions may be canceled upon receipt by the IPS payroll department of
written notice, who shall forward a copy of such notice to the IEA UniServ Director not
more than eight (8) days after its receipt. Deductions shall continue from year to
year unless canceled as provided herein. The Board shall transmit the membership
dues to the Association on the same basis and timetable that it transmits other payroll
deductions. The Board shall not be liable to the Association, the ISTA, or the NEA, for
failure to make deductions for dues. In the event of any overcharge already remitted to
the Association, it shall be the responsibility of the Association alone to adjust the matter
with the teacher overcharged. In the event of undercharge the Board shall (after
receiving written notice of the undercharge from the Association office) make a
correction during the next succeeding pay periods.

              Section 2: Payroll deductions are available for the following:

             A.      Mandatory deductions:

                    1.      Federal income tax
                    2.      State income tax; and
                    3.      Social Security.

             B.      Voluntary deductions:

                    1.      Tax-deferred annuities/tax-deferred mutual funds (see
                            Appendix C);
                    2.      Group Health, Accident Major Medical Insurance;
                    3.      Group Life Insurance;
                    4.      Income Protection--Long Term Disability;
                    5.      Association Dues;


                                             -3-
                    6.     Credit Union;
                    7.     IPS Charitable Giving Campaign(s);
                    8.     Insurance programs officially endorsed by the Association,
                           provided that the Association shall not endorse more than five
                           (5) such programs;
                    9.     U.S. Savings Bonds if authorized by two percent (2%) of
                           the unit members;
                    10.    INDYPAC/IPACE/NEA Fund for Children and Public
                           Education if authorized by unit members; and
                    11.    IPS Education Foundation
            Authorized voluntary deductions will be taken from the twenty-six
paychecks issued.

               Section 3: Members of the Negotiating Unit may participate in tax-
deferred annuities/tax-deferred mutual funds, under IRS Code 403(b)(7) under provisions
developed by the parties in 1983. Effective July 1, 2006, the companies available for
payroll deductions for such programs shall be the companies listed in Appendix C of this
Agreement. Additional annuities may be added if authorized in writing by five percent
(5%) of the unit members and they are willing to enter into the conditions and
agreements required by IPS. The three (3) companies with the lowest participation
rates will be eliminated each year until all remaining companies have a participation rate
of at least five percent (5%).




                                            -4-
                                      ARTICLE III

                                PROFESSIONAL AND
                                PERSONAL LEAVES

             Section 1: Personal. Each teacher shall annually be granted three (3)
days for personal leave. These days shall be used for any purpose at the discretion of
the teacher and may be taken in time periods of not less than one-half (½) days. No
reason must be given other than personal business. Teachers shall be given an
accounting of their unused personal leave days on each paycheck advice Unused
personal leave days shall be added to accumulated sick leave at the end of the school
year up to the maximum for sick leave accumulation. However, if a teacher has an
attendance record of 97% or higher for the previous school year (excluding FMLA leave
and professional development days), then the teacher shall be permitted to carry over
and accumulate unused personal days up to a maximum of four (4) personal leave
days, and any unused personal leave days beyond the four (4) shall be added to
accumulated sick leave. Any teacher who is initially contracted on or after the first day
of the second semester of any school year shall be entitled to one-half (½) of the
foregoing annual amount of personal leave for that school year.

               Section 2: Bereavement. In case of death in the immediate family at a
time when school is in session, the employed teacher shall be allowed leave with full
pay for up to five (5) consecutive working days within 14 calendar days following the
date of such death. The immediate family is defined to include: husband, wife, child,
grandchild, parents or guardian, grandparents, sister, brother, each similar relationship
established by marriage, any other legal dependent, and any person for whom the
teacher was a legal dependent. A teacher shall be allowed one (1) day's leave of
absence with full pay to attend the funeral of an aunt, uncle, niece or nephew, and each
similar relationship established by marriage. In the event of the death of a member of
the faculty of a school, other members of that faculty and other teachers, who were
members of the same school faculty as the deceased in either of the two (2) preceding
school years and/or were on the same school faculty with the deceased for at least five
(5) school years, will be allowed released time to attend the funeral if such teacher(s)
can arrange coverage of classes by other faculty member(s) of that school.

               Section 3: Professional. A teacher may request time off with or without
pay for attendance at programs, conferences, workshops or seminars conducted by
colleges, universities, governmental agencies, the NEA, ISTA, IEA, or affiliates thereof,
and any other professional organization whose activities are related to education or the
job of a teacher. Such request shall be directed to the Superintendent or his/her
designee. The Board may provide sufficient funds to pay expenses incurred by
teachers on professional leaves. The teacher shall file a written report of his/her
activities within one (1) week of his/her return from a conference, etc., for which the
Board has provided funds to cover the teacher's expenses. The Board may consider
projected teacher absenteeism for the day for which leave is requested in considering
such requests.


                                           -5-
             Section 4: Legal. In the event a teacher is required to perform jury duty,
any jury duty remuneration that is offered shall be deducted from the teacher's pay.

             Section 5: Civic. A teacher may be granted, upon request, a
non-paid leave to perform civic duties at the state or local level for up to two (2) days
per year. The Board may consider projected teacher absenteeism for the day for which
leave is requested in considering such requests.

             Section 6: Religious. Any teacher shall be granted, if notice is provided
to his/her immediate supervisor not less than two (2) weeks in advance, up to three (3)
days per year for observance of recognized religious holidays which occur on scheduled
school days, such leave to be without pay.

              Section 7: Emergency Leave. If a teacher has exhausted his/her annual
three (3) days of personal leave, and the teacher or a member of the teacher's
immediate family is involved in an emergency, he/she may apply to convert up to five (5)
sick leave days for any such year to an emergency leave day. Request for such
conversion must be submitted to a special committee composed of two (2) individuals
appointed by the Association President and two (2) individuals appointed by the
Superintendent. The Committee may request reasons or justification for such
conversion, and a majority decision by the Committee shall be required to approve the
conversion -- which will normally be after the absence for which the conversion is
requested. This applies only to emergencies, and the parties anticipate that conversion
will occur only under limited, extraordinary circumstances.




                                           -6-
                                       ARTICLE IV

                          ILLNESS OR DISABILITY LEAVES

               Section 1: Personal Illness. Every teacher shall have ten (10) sick
leave days during his/her first year in the system and eight (8) days sick leave each
year thereafter. In any given year, seven (7) of such days may be used due to illness of
any member of the teacher's immediate family (as defined in Article III, Section 2). If
a teacher takes a leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act (see Section 2)
to care for a child, parent or spouse, then the teacher, upon request, can use up to an
additional twenty (20) accumulated sick days concurrently with FMLA. A teacher may
accumulate unused sick leave without limit, which accumulated leave shall be used for
sick leave purposes only. Any teacher who is initially contracted on or after the first
day of the second semester of any school year shall be entitled to one-half (1/2) of the
foregoing annual amount of sick leave for that school year.

               Section 2: Family and Medical Leave Act. Teachers should be aware
that they also may qualify for leave under the terms of the Family and Medical Leave Act
(FMLA). Such leaves are provided for, and governed by, federal law. FMLA leaves are
unpaid; however, under certain circumstances a teacher may be required or permitted to
utilize other paid leave provided by this Agreement concurrently with FMLA leave, which
could result in the teacher receiving pay for some or all of the time the teacher is on
FMLA leave. When a teacher is on FMLA leave, he/she shall earn credit on the salary
schedule as though the teacher had been actively teaching during the period of the
leave. IPS will continue to pay its portion of all insurance coverages provided for in this
Agreement while a teacher is on an FMLA leave. Rules for implementation of the
FMLA are established by IPS. To apply for an FMLA leave, contact the Human
Resources Division to obtain the appropriate information and forms.

              Section 3: The Sick Leave Bank is established for use by teachers who
have exhausted their own accumulated sick leave. Any teacher may participate by
voluntarily contributing one (1) sick leave day per year to the Bank. Days shall be
contributed by October 15 (or thirty (30) days after the ratification of the Agreement,
whichever is later) of each year. Any new teacher hired after October 15th in any
school year may contribute a day to the Bank within his/her first thirty (30) school
days of employment. Only teachers who have contributed to the Bank shall be eligible to
derive benefits from the Bank. The Bank shall be administered by the Association,
and any grant approval received by the IPS by 9:00 a.m. on the Friday of a regular
payday shall be paid by way of the adjustment procedure no later than the following
Thursday. Grants under this provision shall not exceed Two Hundred Forty-One
Thousand One Hundred Thirty-Six Dollars ($241,136.00) during the 2009-2010 school
year




                                            -7-
                                       ARTICLE V

                            UNPAID LEAVES OF ABSENCE

              Section 1: Teaching. Upon application, a leave of absence of up to
one (1) year may be granted to any teacher to teach out of the State of Indiana, provided
said teacher states his/her intention to return to the school system. The application
deadline shall be June 15 immediately preceding the school year during which the leave
shall be taken for Alternative Calendar schools and July 1 immediately preceding the
school year during which the leave shall be taken for Regular Calendar schools. Such
leave shall be extended for one (1) school year upon written request by the teacher made
pursuant to Section 13. Upon return from such leave, a teacher shall be placed at the
same position on the salary schedule as he/she would have been had he/she taught
in the district during such period but in no case will credit on the salary schedule exceed
one (1) year except as provided in Article IX, Section 4; and, furthermore, he/she
shall receive all rights and benefits which generally accrue to any teacher. Eligibility
for this provision shall be a minimum of two (2) years' teaching in the Indianapolis
Public Schools.

              Section 2: Study. A leave of absence without pay of not more than
one (1) year's duration shall be granted upon application to the teacher for the purpose of
engaging in full-time study (a minimum of 24 semester hours during the regular school
year) at an accredited college or university in a field which is related to the teacher's
professional responsibilities. The application deadline shall be June 15 immediately
preceding the school year during which the leave shall be taken for Alternative Calendar
schools and July 1 immediately preceding the school year during which the leave
shall be taken for Regular Calendar schools. Such leave shall be extended for a
second school year upon written request by the teacher and under the condition that
such teacher met the full-time study requirements of this Section during the first year and
shall meet said requirements during the second year. Credit on the salary schedule shall
be given (for up to one (1) year) as though the teacher had taught in the system during
such period.

              Section 3: Military. A military leave of absence without pay shall be
granted to any teacher who shall be inducted or shall enlist for military duty in any branch
of the armed forces of the United States. For the purpose of placing the individual on the
salary schedule upon his or her return, up to five (5) years of military experience shall be
counted as teaching experience for every teacher who shall have been granted a leave
for military service and shall have served honorably, unless otherwise required by
applicable law.

               Section 4: Association Work. A leave of absence of up to one (1) school
year shall be granted to any teacher upon application, for the purpose of serving as an
officer or staff member of the Association (local, state and/or national). The application
deadline shall be June 15 immediately preceding the school year during which the leave
shall be taken for Alternative Calendar schools and July 1 immediately preceding the


                                            -8-
school year during which the leave shall be taken for Regular Calendar schools.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, such leave shall be extended for
one (1) school year upon written request by the teacher, mailed at least sixty (60) days
prior to the end of the first leave. Any teacher serving as President of the Indianapolis
Education Association shall be granted extensions of leave under this Section for the
length of the term or terms he/she serves in such capacity. Upon returning from such
leave, such teacher shall be placed at the same position on the salary schedule as would
be appropriate if the teacher had taught in the system during such period; and
furthermore, shall receive all rights and benefits which generally accrue to any teacher.
Prior to returning from said leave, the teacher will be provided notification of each
vacancy as it occurs for which the teacher is certified and shall have first choice of any
openings over new teachers and teachers with less experience.

              Section 5: Pregnancy Disability. A teacher who has a pregnancy-
related disability is entitled to leave for the period of the disability. All such applications
for granting and/or extending said leaves shall be accompanied by a statement from a
licensed physician attesting to the inability of the teacher to continue her teaching duties.
Accumulated sick leave may be used for any part of the disability leave. The teacher is
requested to give as much advance notice as possible of her return to work date. Any
leave under this provision runs concurrently with FMLA.

             Section 6: Child Rearing. A leave of absence without pay spanning not
more than two (2) consecutive school years shall be granted upon application to a
teacher for child rearing purposes. If the requested leave is not due to birth or adoption,
then the application deadline shall be June 15 immediately preceding the school year
during which the leave shall be taken for Alternative Calendar schools and July 1
immediately preceding the school year during which the leave shall be taken for Regular
Calendar schools. Such leave shall be without pay. The teacher normally will return at
the beginning of a grading period. Other arrangements must be by agreement with the
Human Resources Division. Any leave under this provision runs concurrently with
FMLA.

             Section 7: Adoptive. An adopting teacher may request a short term
adoptive leave under the provisions of the FMLA.

               Section 8: Disability. A teacher who is unable to teach because of
personal illness or disability shall be granted, upon application, a leave of absence,
without pay, for the duration of such illness or disability but not more than one (1) school
year. Such leave or the first one- (1) year extension thereof shall be extended for one (1)
additional school year upon written request by the teacher. Such a leave and extensions
thereof shall not be granted for more than a total of three (3) consecutive school
years. If the teacher continues to be disabled and is unable to return to work after three
consecutive school years, then he/she will be deemed to have resigned his/her
employment with IPS. However, the teacher shall continue to be entitled to receive any
disability benefits to which he/she is entitled. Additionally, if the teacher recovers and is
released to return to work, then he/she will be given preference to fill an open position for
which he/she is qualified. All such applications for granting and/or extending said leaves

                                              -9-
shall be accompanied by a statement from a licensed physician attesting to the inability
of the teacher to continue his or her teaching duties. The teacher is requested to give as
much advance notice as possible of his/her return to work date. A teacher need not
have depleted all sick leave available in order to be granted an unpaid leave for illness or
disability. Any leave under this provision runs concurrently with FMLA.

             Section 9: Public Office. Leaves without pay shall be granted to serve in
elected public office. Such leaves shall be granted annually and renewed annually for
the length of the term of office. In addition, a reasonable period of time may be
granted to a teacher for the purpose of campaigning for himself/herself for public office
and the approval or disapproval for campaigning shall not be based on factors related to
the position sought or the political views or party of the candidate. Teachers must
give written notice to the IPS Human Resources Department as far in advance as
possible.

              Section 10: Family Illness. A leave of absence without pay or increment
of up to one (1) year shall be granted for the purpose of caring for a sick member of the
teacher's immediate family. Any leave under this provision runs concurrently with FMLA.

             Section 11: Other Unpaid Leaves. Upon application, a teacher shall be
granted a one- (1) year leave of absence without pay for any reason other than being
employed by another primary or secondary educational institution in Indiana or a
circumstance covered by Sections 1 through 10 of this Article, provided that the teacher:
(1) makes the request no later than the June 15 immediately preceding the school year
during which the leave shall be taken for Alternative Calendar schools and the July 1
immediately preceding the school year during which the leave shall be taken for Regular
Calendar schools; (2) the teacher requesting the leave has not been granted a leave
under this provision previously; and (3) the teacher requesting the leave has not
taken any other leave under this Article during the previous school year. A teacher shall
not receive any experience credit on the salary schedule for the year spent on such
leave.

               Section 12: Unrequested Leaves. No teacher shall be placed on an
involuntary unpaid leave during the life of this Agreement unless the teacher is afforded
the opportunity for a hearing provided in Board Resolution No. 1043 (November, 1973).
Such leave may be recommended by the Superintendent only for reason of physical
disability or sickness, insubordination, immorality, incompetency, neglect of duty, or other
good and just cause. A teacher who is placed on suspension pending a decision by the
Board under Board Resolution No. 1043 shall continue to receive full pay and benefits
pending said decision.

            Section 13: Return from Leave. Teachers are encouraged to give as
much notice as possible of their intent to return from a leave of absence. For teachers
who are on a leave of absence for one (1) year or longer the following notification
requirements apply:




                                            -10-
      1.     By January 15, IPS will send by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
             the last address the teacher provided to the Human Resources Division a
             form for the teacher to declare for the upcoming school year if he/she is
             going to return to work, extend the leave (if an extension is available) or
             resign;
      2.      By March 1, the teacher must return the completed form to the Human
              Resources Division;

      3.      If the teacher does not do so, then the teacher shall be deemed to have
              resigned his/her employment with IPS.

Upon return from any leave, a teacher shall be assigned to a position comparable to
his/her previous position, if available. In no event will the teacher's base pay be less
than it would be if he/she were to return to the position held prior to the leave. Insurance
programs may be retained at employee expense during the leave.




                                             -11-
                                     ARTICLE VI

                                    JOB SHARING

            Section 1: The phrase "job sharing" shall mean two (2)
bargaining unit members sharing one (1) full-time position. Job sharers shall not be
deemed part-time employees.

               Section 2: The Board shall pay, on behalf of each job-sharing
teacher, seventy-five percent (75%) of the amount toward the fringe benefits set forth
in Article XI of the collective bargaining agreement that the Board pays for full-time
teachers. In addition, members of a job-sharing team shall receive one-half (1/2) the
number of sick days and personal leave days provided to full-time teachers. Both
members of a job-sharing team shall be responsible for attending all faculty meetings,
parent-teacher conference, and in-service sessions which the full-time bargaining unit
employees assigned to their building are required to attend.

              Section 3: Absences of one (1) member of a job-sharing team of three (3)
or fewer days at one time may be covered by the other member of such team provided
the job-sharers have agreed to such a plan and properly notify the administration of the
school of such agreement and of each incident when such an absence is to be covered
by the other team member. If any absence is covered in this manner, the absent teacher
shall not be required to use sick leave or personal leave for such absences.

          Section 4: Each job sharer shall advance on the salary
schedule as if he/she had taught full-time.




                                          -12-
                                        ARTICLE VII

                           RETIREMENT PAY AND BENEFITS

              Section 1: Any teacher declaring his or her intention to retire at the
close of the school year shall upon retirement receive from the Board a lump sum
payment for each year of service in the Indianapolis Public Schools and for each day of
unused sick leave provided the Human Resources Division is informed in writing. This
payment will be made to the teacher’s 403(b) account. An Intent to Retire form may be
obtained from the Human Resources office or the Association office. The service credit
will be prorated for any partial year of service in the Indianapolis Public Schools.

              Subject to the cap listed below and on a first come-first served basis, if a
teacher completes an Intent to Retire form declaring his/her intent to retire at the close of
the school year and submits it to the Human Resources Division before July 1st of the
year preceding his/her intended retirement, the lump sum payment shall consist of an
amount equal to one hundred and twenty-five dollars ($125) for each year of IPS service
and fifty-five dollars ($55) for each day of unused sick leave. For those giving notice
between July 1st and October 31st, the figures for the lump sum payment shall be one
hundred and fifteen dollars ($115) for each year of service and forty-five dollars ($45) for
each unused sick leave day. If notice is given between November 1st and March
31st, the figures shall be one hundred and ten dollars ($110) for each year of IPS service
and forty dollars ($40) for each unused sick leave day. Those giving notice on April 1st or
thereafter shall receive one hundred and five dollars ($105) for each year of IPS
service and thirty-five dollars ($35) for each unused sick leave day. The maximum
total payments above $105 for each year of service and $35 per day of unused sick
leave shall not exceed One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000) in any school
year. The added amounts shall be paid to teachers in order of their submission of Intent
To Retire forms until the cap is reached. Years of IPS service after the 2003-2004
school year shall not be taken into account for any teacher in computing benefits under
this Section.

             In the event of a significant change in the teacher's personal situation,
he/she may rescind the intent to retire providing a vacancy for which he/she is certified
exists or becomes available before the effective day of his/her projected retirement.

              Any teacher 62 years of age or under who seeks the service credit benefit
referred to in the preceding paragraph shall submit satisfactory proof that an
application of retirement benefits has been made and approved by one or both of the
following: (a) Social Security, (b) Indiana State Teachers Retirement.

              Additionally, any teacher retiring at the close of the school year under this
Section shall be entitled to the same consideration for employment in a summer school
teaching assignment in the summer immediately following his/her last year of teaching as
that given to any other teacher.



                                             -13-
               The benefits provided under this Section with respect to years of IPS
service shall not be available to any teacher (a) who first begins work in IPS on or after
the first day of the 2000-2001 school year or (b) who, after having terminated IPS
employment for any reason, resumes work in IPS on or after that date.

               The years of service benefit is payable only to teachers who properly
submit their Intent to Retire form by March 6, 2010. Teachers who submit the Intent to
Retire form after that date will not be eligible for the years of service benefit and,
instead, will participate in the buy-out program. In addition, for all teachers who submit
their Intent to Retire form after March 6, 2010, the payment for each unused sick day
shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00).

             Section 2: Should a teacher who is otherwise eligible for retirement pay
and benefits under this Article die during the school year, the amount of money, if any, to
which such teacher would have been entitled under Section 1, shall still be paid.

              Section 3: Each teacher shall have the option to make contributions to the
403(b) Retirement Savings Plan by payroll deduction up to the maximum allowable by
federal law, and IPS shall match the teacher's contribution dollar-for-dollar not to exceed
0.5% of the teacher's base salary or $105, whichever is less.

           Teachers shall have the option of rolling into the Plan assets
from other Tax Sheltered Annuities, as permitted by federal law.

               If a teacher first begins work in IPS prior to the beginning of the 2000-2001
school year, that teacher's Plan accounts shall be fully vested immediately. If a teacher
first begins work in IPS on or after the first day of the 2000-2001 school year, that
teacher's Plan accounts attributable to employer contributions shall become fully vested
after five (5) years of service in the district. If a teacher terminates employment with
IPS for any reason before his or her accounts have become fully vested, those
accounts will be forfeited. If such a teacher later returns to IPS employment, the returning
teacher will start with no account balance and must accumulate five (5) additional years
of service after returning to become fully vested in new account accruals attributable to
employer contributions. A teacher's absence under an authorized leave, paid or unpaid,
will not be a termination of employment.

            Each teacher's Plan accounts attributable to teacher
contributions and rollover contributions shall be fully vested at all times.

             For each pay period, IPS shall deposit the teacher's contribution and the
employer's contribution for each teacher into individual accounts for the teacher, as
established by the selected vendor.

              In the event a teacher's employment is terminated, the teacher may choose
to receive a distribution of the vested balance of his or her Plan accounts, at any time
and in any form permitted by the selected investment provider and federal tax law, or to
transfer that vested balance under applicable federal law. In the event of death, the


                                            -14-
teacher's vested account balance shall be distributed to the teacher's designated
beneficiary, or estate, if no beneficiary exists.




                                          -15-
                                     ARTICLE VIII

                SUMMER SCHOOL, INTERSESSION AND ADULT EDUCATION

             Section 1: Teachers of summer school, intersession and adult education
classes shall be issued a Supplemental Services Teachers Contract. The teachers shall
be paid at an hourly rate which is computed by dividing the teacher's annual base salary
by the number of contract days (190 contract days). This equals the daily rate, which
divided by six (6), equals the teacher's hourly rate.

              Section 2: Any teacher who teaches in the summer school shall be
credited with all appropriate teaching experience for determination of summer school
salary, including the school year which concludes immediately prior to the beginning of
the summer school.

              Section 3: Any teacher employed in the summer school, intersession
and/or the evening school program may annually utilize not more than one (1) of
his/her regularly accumulated days of sick leave or personal business leave for illness
leave during the summer school or evening school program. Each absence from an
individual summer school or evening school session shall be charged as one half (1/2)
of a regular accumulated leave day.




                                          -16-
                                        ARTICLE IX

                           PROFESSIONAL COMPENSATION


              Section 1: The basic salaries of teachers covered by this Agreement are
set forth in Appendix A which is attached to, and incorporated in this Agreement. The
Board shall continue to pay, on behalf of each teacher, the teacher's contribution to the
Indiana State Teachers' Retirement Fund.

             Section 2: Credit shall be given for each year of military service or Teacher
Corp service up to a maximum of four (4) years. A minimum of six (6) months' military
service or Teacher Corp service is necessary to qualify for a year of service.

              Section 3: In order to promote and provide a greater variety of beneficial
continuing education opportunities for IPS teachers, credit on the salary schedule shall
be granted for any in-service training approved by the Superintendent or the Indiana
Professional Standards Board or any of its boards or commissions. Credit shall be given
on the basis of one (1) semester hour equivalent for each fifteen (15) class hours of
instruction or workshop/seminar participation. Multiple courses of less than fifteen (15)
hours each may be combined to earn credit.

              Section 4: Adjustments to higher salary schedules shall be presented to
the Board two (2) times each year. Open periods to record credit shall extend thirty (30)
days beyond the beginning of either school semester and pay adjustment shall be
retroactive to the beginning of the same semester. Except for identifying degree
status, an official transcript listing all courses pertinent to qualifications for advanced
placement shall be sufficient evidence when presented to the Human Resources
Division.

               Section 5: All teachers shall receive full credit on the salary schedule
for full-time outside school-teaching experience in pre-K to 12 accredited schools
completed after the teacher received a Bachelor's degree. No teacher shall be
employed in excess of credit authorized by this schedule.

              Section 6: The individual teacher is responsible for seeing that outside
teaching, military service, Teacher Corp service, degrees, and cumulative sick leave are
properly documented and submitted to the Human Resources Division. In addition, a
teaching certificate shall also be submitted by each professional employee. The Human
Resources Division shall notify teachers of approaching certification problems without
undue delay; however, the primary responsibility for maintaining certification status rests
with the teacher. The Human Resources Division shall publish on or before March 1 and
October 1 of each year a list of all bargaining unit members. The list will include seniority
date, current assignment and all subjects and/or grade areas the teacher is certified to
teach. Any member of the bargaining unit who disagrees with any data on the list shall
notify the Human Resources Division of such discrepancy within thirty (30)
calendar days.

                                            -17-
               Section 7. Teachers performing the following tutoring/workshop
services will be compensated as follows:


1.   Curriculum writing/planning                  $20.00/hour
2.   Workshop Presentation                        $30.00/hour
3.   Preparation for Workshop Presentation        $10.00/hour not to exceed
                                                  $100.00
4.     Tutoring                                   $20.00/hour
5.     Workshop Participant                       $20.00/hour


Licensed employees in some cases may elect to receive CEU's in lieu of pay.

             Section 8: In the event that a member of the certified staff is required to
work on authorized IPS programs or activities beyond the regular school calendar, such
days of work shall be compensated at his/her daily rate unless otherwise specified in
this Agreement.

             Section 9: Basic salaries for teachers shall be paid in twenty-six pays.
               Section 10: Summer checks other than for summer school teachers,
shall be mailed according to the schedule provided by the pay dates (Appendix B), but
any teacher may receive all such checks on the date specified, in Appendix B, except for
teachers who are absent during the last pay period of the school year, in which case that
teacher's last check may be delayed no longer than two weeks.

              Summer school teachers shall be paid current for each two (2) week
period. If check adjustments are necessary, they shall be made to the next check to be
issued, provided that should such an adjustment be necessary to the final check, such
check shall not be held more than five (5) working days.

            Section 11: Deductions for school year personnel for daily
absences not covered by provisions listed in this Agreement shall be made at the rate
of one one hundred ninetieth (1/1 90) of the contracted salary.

              Section 12: Teachers required in the course of their work to drive personal
automobiles from one school building to another or any teacher in other circumstances
for which mileage reimbursement is authorized, shall receive the IRS mileage
reimbursement amount per mile. Such reimbursement shall be paid to a teacher within
a reasonable period of time following submission by the teacher of a voucher for the
same. Any member of the Negotiating Unit who is required to have an automobile as
a condition of employment shall be given a written statement to that effect if he or she
requests it. Teachers are covered by the provisions of Board Resolution No. 1072.



                                           -18-
              S e c t i o n 1 3 : A teacher should have the opportunity to authorize IPS in
writing to use automated electronic transfer of any paycheck(s) or portion of any
paycheck(s) up to as many as four (4) separate checking and/or savings accounts of
the teacher at any financial institutions which participate in the Automated Clearing
House (ACH) system.




                                            -19-
                                    ARTICLE X

     COACHING, ATHLETIC ACTIVITIES AND EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES

             Section 1: The Board will grant supplemental pay to those who are
selected and who perform the following coaching or extracurricular assignments beyond
the routine school day. The supplemental pay is not earned or payable until after the
season or extracurricular activity has been completed.

A.     Senior High School Coaches
        Head Football Coach                        $8491
        Assistant Football Coach                    5678
        Head Basketball Coach                       8491
        Assistant Basketball Coach                  5678
        Head Baseball Coach                         5786
        Assistant Baseball Coach                    4597
        Head Cross County Coach                     4163
        Assistant Cross Country Coach               3622
        Head Track Coach                            5786
        Assistant Track Coach                       4597
        Head Swimming Coach                         4597
        Head Soccer Coach                           4597
        Head Softball Coach                         5786
        Assistant Softball Coach                    4597
        Head Wrestling Coach                        5786
        Assistant Wrestling Coach                   4597
        Head Volleyball Coach                       5786
        Assistant Volleyball Coach                  4336
        Head Tennis Coach                           4163
        Assistant Tennis Coach                      3731
        Head Golf Coach                             4163


B.    Middle School Coaches
       MS Head Football Coach                     $3730
       MS Assistant Football Coach                 2974
       MS Head Basketball Coach                    3730
       MS Assistant Basketball Coach               2974
       MS Head Volleyball Coach                    3298
       MS Assistant Volleyball Coach               2649
       MS Head Baseball Coach                      3082

                                        -20-
       MS Assistant Baseball Coach                   2649
       MS Head Softball Coach                        3082
       MS Assistant Softball Coach                   2649
       MS Head Wrestling Coach                       2974
       MS Assistant Wrestling Coach                  2649
       MS Head Track Coach                           2866
       MS Assistant Track Coach                      2541
       MS Head Soccer Coach                          3298
       MS Assistant Soccer Coach                     2541

C.    Extracurricular Activities


       National Honor Society                               $1386
       Head Orchestra Director                               4676
       Assistant Orchestra Director                          2806
       Vocal Music (Choral Director)                         4676
       Junior Class Sponsor                                  1386
       Senior Class Sponsor                                  1386
       Academic Bowl Team Sponsor                            1559
       Band Director                                         4676
       Assistant Band Director                               2806
       Pep Band Director                                     3000
       Cheerleading Sponsor                                  1645
       FTA, FHA, FFA Sponsors                                1386
       PBA Sponsor                                           1386
       Student Council Sponsor                               1905
       Drama/Acting Coach                                    2598
       Debate/Forensics Coach                                1974
       Academic Club Sponsor                                 1386
       DECA Sponsor                                          1386
       HOSA Sponsor                                          1386
       VICA Sponsor                                          1386
       FBLA Sponsor                                          1368
       Drill/Step Team Sponsor                               3568
       Journalism/Newspaper/Yearbook Sponsor                 3568

              Section 2: Any teacher who serves as a middle school official (referee,
umpire, etc.) shall be paid the standard rate per game/match/meet, and shall be paid at
the end of the respective seasons.


                                          -21-
                                       ARTICLE XI

                                   INSURANCE

              Section 1: Health Insurance

             A.         Programs. The Board shall make available to teachers and their
dependents hospitalization, surgical, major medical and emergency family insurance.
The carrier will rate the teachers as a separate group from other IPS employees when
determining the cost of coverage.

             Employees may select coverage from these two programs:

             (1)     The Advantage Non-HMO.

             (2)     The Advantage HMO.

The health insurance carrier shall be permitted to make contacts through the schools
with teachers in order to inform them of their programs. Such contacts shall be limited to
periods before and after the teacher's work day and through the distribution of materials.

              B.    Types of Coverage. Coverage shall be available on the basis of
four (4) options:

             1.      Employee
             2.      Employee and Child or Children
             3.      Employee and Spouse
             4.      Employee and Family (Spouse and Children)

             C.     Premium Payment. Beginning January 1, 2009, for each
employee electing coverage for himself/herself or including his/her dependents, the
Board shall make the following annual maximum contribution for such coverage, and
the employee shall pay any additional premiums:

                    Employee                            $4,933.00
                    Employee/Child                      $6,727.00
                    Employee/Spouse                     $9,034.00
                    Family                              $9,658.00

               D.      Special Rate. Teachers whose spouses also are IPS employees
are eligible for the same insurance options and the same Board contribution as other
teachers; provided, however, that a teacher cannot be both an employee and a
dependent at the same time.

              Section 2: A forty thousand dollar ($40,000) Group Term Life Insurance
Plan shall be available on the same terms and conditions for all teachers. This coverage
will also be made available at the same cost per thousand of coverage and otherwise

                                            -22-
on the same terms and conditions for all other IPS employees. Teachers desiring to
participate will contribute twenty-six cents ($.26) annually and the Board will contribute
the remainder of the premiums.

             Section 3: Tax Deferred Annuity Programs are available for each teacher.
             Section 4: Each teacher and his/her dependents shall be covered by a
dental insurance plan. The Board shall pay the annual premium with the exception of
twenty-six cents ($.26) which shall be paid by the teacher.

            Section 5: Each teacher shall be covered by a long-term disability
program, provided, however, that the maximum Board contribution shall not exceed
$.33 per hundred per teacher per month. The maximum annual salary covered for
any teacher for this LTD program shall increase to $80,000.

             Section 6: Each teacher shall be covered by a vision care program paid
for by the Board at a maximum Board contribution of six dollars and thirty cents ($6.30) per
employee per month. Each teacher will pay twenty-six cents ($.26) annually. This
program shall provide for eye examinations and lenses and frames every other year.

             Section 7: Any teacher who is employed through the last teaching day of
the school year shall have his or her insurance coverages under this Article continued
through the following August -- even if such teacher is not to be an IPS employee for the
succeeding year.

               Section 8: Eligibility for continuing in the insurance programs listed in this
Article shall be available to those teachers who retire prior to becoming eligible to obtain
coverage under Medicare, providing the applicant has had coverage in the program for
five (5) consecutive years immediately prior to retirement, and providing that such
continued coverage is not contrary to the agreement with the insurance carrier. In
addition, if IPS determines that the law no longer permits participation in insurance
coverages to end when a retired teacher becomes Medicare eligible, then those
insurance coverages will not be offered to retirees, except as required by law. In
addition, a retiring teacher will have any and all conversion rights that may be available.
The former employee shall be required to make monthly payments in advance for such
protection.

               Section 9: The plan, carrier or specifications of any program in this
Article shall not be changed without mutual agreement.

             Section 10: The Association and the Board agree to continue the current
Section 125 plan, which allows for funding of certain insurance, health care, non-
reimbursed medical and dependent care expenses as permitted by Section 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code. Consistent with applicable law, the Section 125 plan will provide
that employees have automatically elected to pay their portion of health insurance
premiums on a pre-tax basis, unless they submit a written election to the contrary.



                                             -23-
              Section 11: An Employee Assistance Program (EAP) shall continue to be
available to assist employees and their family members with marital, family, alcohol,
drug and substance abuse problems or other personal concerns. The Board shall
pay the cost of the EAP (at a maximum Board contribution of Two Dollars and Ninety
Cents ($2.90) per employee per month). The EAP will provide initial counseling,
diagnostic and prescriptive services to employees. LifeServices EAP shall provide the
services under the EAP.




                                        -24-
                                      ARTICLE XII

                                COMPENSATORY TIME


              If any teacher's preparation time is infringed by substituting for an absent
teacher, he/she shall be granted compensatory time for all such loss -- which time may
be taken at the teacher's option in half-days or full-day periods. Employees shall provide
two (2) days of advance notice before taking the time off. Such advance notice shall be
waived in an emergency or for good cause. On all occasions, such advance notice
requirement shall be waived if the absence would not create any undue difficulty. A
teacher may also utilize such compensatory time on an hourly (or quarterly-hourly) basis
during any time that students are not present and regular or valid emergency
faculty/departmental meetings or other meetings scheduled prior to a timely teacher
request are to be held.




                                           -25-
                                      ARTICLE XIII

                           EMERGENCY SCHOOL CLOSING

               Section 1: If a school is officially closed by the General
Superintendent because of an emergency, all teachers shall receive full pay for each
day on which school is closed. No teacher shall be required to be in attendance when
pupils in his/her building are not present due to emergency school closing or emergency
early dismissal.

             Section 2: The Superintendent may waive a salary deduction in the event
that a teacher is prevented from traveling from his place of residence to his regular place
of employment because of extreme weather conditions affecting the passability of the
streets and roads; provided, however, that such teacher must give his immediate
supervisor as much advance notice of an intended absence as possible and that any
request for waiver of a salary deduction shall be in writing and shall state precisely the
reasons why such teacher was prevented from traveling to his regular place of
employment.

             Section 3: The Superintendent may waive a salary deduction in the event
that a teacher is delayed in traveling to his place of employment because of extreme
weather conditions affecting the passability of the streets and roads; provided, however,
that such teacher notifies the immediate supervisor as soon as possible of his/her
estimated time of arrival. The supervisor may request in writing the reason for such
delay.

              Section 4: Teachers are paid for Emergency School Closings
(Article XIII, Section 1); therefore, any scheduled make-up days are without pay.
Teachers shall be allowed to use leave days (such as personal, bereavement, illness,
or religious leave days) on any scheduled make-up days subject to the same conditions
as on any other school day.

              Section 5: If schools are closed and teachers are not required to report,
due to inclement weather or other emergency, on a day on which a teacher had
prearranged to take a leave, the teacher shall not be charged for such a leave day. If
schools are open on such a prearranged leave day, but schools are then closed due to
inclement weather or other emergency so that students are dismissed early that day, the
teacher will be charged only one-half (1/2) day of leave, unless the schools are closed and
students depart more than three and three-quarter (3 3/4) hours after teachers report, in
which case the full day of leave shall be charged to the teacher.




                                           -26-
                                      ARTICLE XIV

                               TEACHER'S PROTECTION

              Section 1: As long as IPS' investigation shows that the teacher acted
appropriately, the Board shall, upon request, provide legal counsel and assistance for
the defense of a teacher in any civil or criminal action or threatened action against the
teacher which arises out of or is connected with such teacher's supervision of pupils
during the regular school day or during any school related activity approved by the Board
or its representatives whenever occurring.

              Section 2: Teachers shall suffer no loss of wages or reduction in
accumulated leave when appearing as a witness before a judicial body or legal
authority for school-related cases.

               Section 3: In case of an unprovoked assault on a teacher by student(s) or
non-student(s) on school property or on school business, the Board shall be responsible
for making available full reimbursement upon proof of value to the teacher for any item of
personal property damaged in such assault. Furthermore, any absence due to injury or
disability as a result of such assault shall not be charged against the teacher's sick leave
or any other leave provided for elsewhere in this Agreement, subject to the provisions of
Article IV, Section 3. Benefits under this Section shall be available to teachers who
certify their willingness to file charges and pursue legal avenues in prosecuting such
cases. Legal counsel and assistance will be provided the teacher in prosecuting such
cases to their final resolution.




                                            -27-
                                       ARTICLE XV


                              MISCELLANEOUS BENEFITS


              Section 1: The Board shall reimburse each teacher up to One Hundred
Eighty-One Dollars and Ten Cents ($181.10) during the 2009-2010 school year for
purchases of educational supplies and materials (not available in the teacher's building)
for classroom use. Original receipts shall be submitted by the teacher not later than
November 10th of each year and shall be reimbursed not later than December 31st of
each year. Supplemental receipts may be submitted not later than April 1st of each
year and shall be reimbursed not later than June 30th of that year. All items
purchased are the property of IPS. All non-consumable items purchased shall remain
in the school if the teacher moves to a different school. However, a teacher may take
consumable items with him/her if he/she moves to another IPS school.

              Section 2: Teacher participation in extra-curricular activities for which
they are not paid is voluntary. Sponsorship of clubs and athletic activities shall continue to
be compensated.

              Section 3: Teachers will be compensated $50 for each night they are
required to be away from their residence participating in the IPS Out-of-City Outdoor
Education Program or any comparable program for which the Board has approved this
payment.

              Section 4: The cost of any examinations required by the Board or law,
shall be paid by the Board.

              Section 5: Any charges for supplies or teaching materials purchased by a
teacher through the school system for use in classroom instruction activities and any
charges for tuition or instruction in a course, workshop, or seminar offered through the
Office of Professional Development (OPD) may be charged against the individual
teacher's supplies reimbursement entitlement provided for in Section 1 of this Article by
completing a voucher form and submitting same through the OPD.

              Section 6: Sixteen (16) days in each even-numbered year and twenty-
four (24) days in each odd-numbered year shall be available for released time for
teachers to work on legislative matters, including visits to the Indiana General Assembly
and related activities which may include meetings with the IPS Legislative Liaison
Office. The Association President will identify the individuals to be released under this
provision, but no teacher will be released more than four (4) days in any school
year under this Section. The Association will continue to work cooperatively with IPS
to develop and promote a joint legislative program.




                                             -28-
                                     ARTICLE XVI

                                        HOURS

            Section 1: The regular teacher workday shall be 7.5 hours with a
duty-free lunch of at least 30 minutes between 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
             Section 2. All designated service agreements will be calculated on a 6-
hour day of service, except as otherwise required by law.




                                           -29-
                                        ARTICLE XVII

                                  REDUCTION IN FORCE

            Section 1. In the event a reduction in force is necessary, the following
procedures shall apply:

             a.      IPS will identify the teaching areas to be reduced.

             b.      IPS will identify the least senior teacher(s) in those areas.

             c.      IPS will select the least senior teacher(s) to be laid off, and seniority
shall be determinative.
              d.      A teacher who is identified to be laid off shall be allowed to displace
the least senior teacher in another teaching assignment for which that teacher is certified
and has the ability to perform.

              Section 2. Subject to the second and third paragraphs of this Section,
seniority as used in this Agreement shall be based upon the length of service in IPS with
the seniority date to be the date on which the teacher first served as a teacher in the IPS.
Leaves authorized by the Board shall not reduce seniority, and a teacher who returns to
IPS employment after a break in such employment shall not be given seniority credit for
the period of time during which he or she was not an employee of or on leave from the
IPS. If two individuals have identical length of IPS service, seniority shall be further
determined by total length of service in the teaching profession. If seniority is identical
when total length of service in the teaching profession is considered, the date of birth for
the teacher shall be utilized to determine seniority, with the older teacher being most
senior.

              Individuals employed by IPS in administrative positions as of August 29,
1985, who were promoted and/or transferred from Negotiating Unit positions into the
administration, shall continue to accrue seniority for purposes of this Article. Individuals
who were promoted after August 29, 1985, or in the future are promoted and/or
transferred from Negotiating Unit positions to administrative positions, shall continue to
accrue seniority for purposes of this Article for up to two years after assuming the
administrative position, provided the individual continues to be employed in the IPS
system as an administrator. (This does not affect the individual's placement on the
salary scale or his/her entitlement to other benefits based on seniority if the individual
later returns to a Negotiating Unit position.)

              After November 1, 2001, if an individual leaves IPS other than through a
reduction in force and then returns to IPS as a teacher, the individual shall start over with
respect to accruing seniority for purposes of this Article. (This does not affect placement
of the individual on the salary scale or the person's entitlement to other benefits based
on seniority.)

             Section 3. To the extent permitted by State law, (a) teachers who are
assigned to any magnet schools/programs cannot be displaced in a reduction in force by
teachers from other schools/programs. The magnet schools/programs currently include,
                                         -30-
but are not limited to, Key School, CFI, New Tech, Montessori, Gifted and Talented,
Spanish Immersion, Crispus Attucks, Shortridge, Broad Ripple and John Marshall Master
teachers.




                                        -31-
                                      ARTICLE XVIII

                                      EVALUATION


               Section 1. The parties agree that because of changes in I.C. 20-3.1, there
no longer is a requirement for evaluating all teachers in the Indianapolis Public Schools
twice yearly. Accordingly, the parties agree that during the 2005-2006 school year,
teachers with more than five (5) years of experience in the IPS school district will not be
subject to evaluation unless: (1) they had a change of assignment, (2) they are in their
first year at a school, (3) they are on a Performance Improvement Plan, (4) they are due
for evaluation in the evaluation cycle of their school or (5) there is documented
reasonable cause to believe that evaluation is warranted. All teachers with five (5) years
of experience or less in the IPS school district shall be subject to comprehensive
evaluation each school year. The parties agree that the evaluation timelines, guidelines,
and documents as they appear in the District Academic Achievement Plan as approved
by the Board of School Commissioners on August 31, 2000, are the documents that shall
govern those evaluated under this Article. (See Appendix D.) The parties further agree
that schools wishing to pilot an alternative form of evaluation may do so after receiving a
majority vote from the educators eligible to vote at their school site and approval of the
Board. The educator vote shall be conducted by secret ballot by the senior IEA
representative at the school site and by a designated administrator.

          Section 2. For ancillary staff, the current evaluation
instrument(s) will continue to be used.




                                           -32-
                                        ARTICLE XIX

                    GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURE

             Section 1: Definition.

             (a)      A "grievance" is any violation of a provision of this Agreement,
including any violation arising from a misapplication or misinterpretation of this
Agreement.

             (b)    "Day" or "days" refers to days when teachers are scheduled to be in
attendance, except that during the summer break, they mean weekdays (Monday
through Friday) other than holidays IPS observes.

             Section 2. Procedure.

            (a)       Step One. If a teacher believes he/she has a grievance, he/she
must present it to his/her immediate supervisor. The teacher and supervisor then shall
meet informally to discuss the matter.

             (b)     Step Two.

              (1)      If the grievance is not settled at Step One, then within twenty (20)
days of the occurrence of facts giving rise to the grievance and/or the date on which the
grievant or the Association knew or through reasonable diligence should have known of
the facts giving rise to the grievance, the teacher may present a formal written grievance
by fully completing the form attached as Appendix E and delivering it to the Chief of
Human Resources. If the Chief of Human Resources does not receive the grievance
within the specified time, then the grievance shall be deemed null and void, and there
shall be no further proceedings on it.

             (2)     If the Association believes there is a grievance that affects a whole
class of teachers, then within twenty (20) days of the occurrence of facts giving rise to
the grievance and/or the date on which any of the affected teachers or the Association
knew or through reasonable diligence should have known of facts giving rise to the
grievance, the Association may present a formal written grievance by fully completing the
form attached as Appendix E and delivering it to the Chief of Human Resources. If the
Chief of Human Resources does not receive the grievance within the specified time, then
the grievance shall be deemed null and void, and there shall be no further proceedings
on it.

              Within fifteen (15) days after receiving the written grievance, the Chief of
Human Resources or a designee shall meet with the grievant on the grievance. Within
fifteen (15) days of the conclusion of the meeting, the Chief of Human Resources or
designee shall provide a written response to the grievant and the Association. If the
Chief of Human Resources or designee does not respond within the designated time,
then the grievance shall be deemed denied at the expiration of the period in which
he/she was supposed to respond, and the grievant may proceed to arbitration.


                                             -33-
             (c)     Arbitration.

              (1)      Request for Arbitration. If the grievant is not satisfied with the
disposition of the grievance at Step Two, the grievant may, within ten (10) days after the
Chief of Human Resources or designee gave, or was supposed to give, his/her written
response, appeal the grievance to arbitration by making a written request to the
American Arbitration Association for a panel of seven (7) arbitrators to hear the case and
copying the Chief of Human Resources on the request. If the request is not made within
the specified time, then the grievance shall be deemed withdrawn, and there shall be no
further proceedings on the grievance.

              (2)      Striking Arbitrators. After receiving the AAA panel of arbitrators,
the parties shall alternately strike names, and the last name remaining shall be the
arbitrator who hears the case. The AAA rules shall govern the arbitration proceedings.

              (3)      Pre-Arbitration Conference. At any time more than thirty (30) days
before the scheduled arbitration hearing, either party may request a pre-arbitration
conference (similar to a pre-trial conference). If a pre-arbitration conference is timely
requested, it shall be held within fifteen (15) days of the request unless mutually
extended. At the conference, the parties shall exchange witness lists, documentary
evidence and attempt to reach agreement on a statement of the issues. Neither party
will be permitted to assert in any arbitration proceeding any grounds or evidence not
previously disclosed in earlier stages of the grievance process or during the pre-
arbitration conference, if any. However, if evidence that was not obtained, and could not
have been obtained through reasonable efforts, is later discovered, it may only be used
at the arbitration hearing if it is promptly disclosed to the other party. In that event, the
other party is entitled to reschedule the arbitration to a later date if it is necessary to
evaluate and prepare a response to the new evidence.

              (4)      Arbitrator's Authority. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final
and binding on both parties. However, the arbitrator is empowered only to hear and
render decisions on alleged violations of this Agreement, and, in doing so, the arbitrator
shall have no power to alter, add to, subtract from or modify in any way the terms of this
Agreement. Any monetary reimbursements an arbitrator may order cannot go back
further in time than the beginning of the school year in which the grievant submitted the
grievance to the Chief of Human Resources at Step Two. Each party will pay their own
costs for the arbitration and will pay one-half of the cost of the arbitrator.

               Section 3. Time Limits. The time limits provided in this Article shall be
strictly observed and may be extended only by written agreement of the parties. If a
grievant fails to initiate a grievance or appeal a decision at any level within the prescribed
time limit, the grievance shall be deemed null and void, and there shall be no further
proceedings on the grievance. If an administrator at any level fails to respond within the
prescribed time limit, then the grievance may be advanced to the next step of the
procedure as long as it is done so within the time limits specified in this Article.

             Section 4. Mediation. At any point in the process, the parties may
mutually agree to mediate or use other alternative dispute resolution procedures in an
attempt to amicably resolve the grievance.
                                             -34-
               Section 5. Scope of Procedure. This Grievance and Arbitration
Procedure shall cover all grievances as defined in this Article, except those the teacher
chooses to pursue in another forum (e.g., any District complaint procedure, any federal,
state or local agency such as the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the
Indiana Civil Rights Commission, or any lawsuit or other legal proceeding) by asserting
claims that are based on essentially the same acts, omissions or facts that form the basis
of the alleged grievance. In that event, a grievance shall not be filed and, if it already is
filed, then the grievance and any proceedings that already have occurred shall be
deemed null and void. This Section shall not in any way limit the evidence or theories a
grievant may assert in proceedings properly brought pursuant to this Article.

               Section 6. Separate Files. All documents, communications, and records
dealing with the processing of a grievance shall be filed separately from the personnel
files of the participants.

              Section 7. Scheduling Grievance Meetings. Every effort will be made to
schedule all grievance meetings at times which will not interfere with the regular work
day of the teachers involved. If any grievance meeting or hearing is scheduled during
the school day, any teacher required by either party to participate as a witness and/or
grievant in such meeting or hearing shall be released from regular duties without loss of
pay. Such period should be held to the minimum necessary absence.

            Section 8. Association Representation. A teacher has the right to
have an Association representative present during any discussions, meetings or
hearings under this Grievance and Arbitration Procedure.




                                             -35-
                                       ARTICLE XX

                                 TERM OF AGREEMENT

             Section 1: This Agreement shall be effective as of September 1, 2007,
and shall continue in effect through August 31, 2010.

               This Agreement shall not be extended orally and it is expressly understood
that it shall expire on the date indicated. This Agreement is made and entered into at
Indianapolis, Indiana on this _____ day of __________ , 2009, by and between the
Indianapolis Board of School Commissioners of the City of Indianapolis, County of
Marion, State of Indiana, party of the first part heretofore referred to as the "Board" and
the Indianapolis Education Association, affiliated with the Indiana State Teachers
Association, and the National Education Association, party of the second part, heretofore
referred to as the "Association". This Agreement is so attested to by the parties whose
signatures appear below.

                              INDIANAPOLIS EDUCATION
                                    ASSOCIATION

             By________________________________________________
                          President of the Association

             By________________________________________________
                         Chairperson, Bargaining Team

             By________________________________________________
                          Negotiator for the Association


                               BOARD OF SCHOOL
                          COMMISSIONERS OF THE SCHOOL
                              CITY OF INDIANAPOLIS

             By________________________________________________
                             President of the Board

             By________________________________________________
                                Superintendent

             By________________________________________________
                            Negotiator for the Board




                                            -36-
                                          APPENDIX A

                                    SALARY SCHEDULES

       1.     Appendix A--The salary scale for the 2007-2008 and 2009-2010 school years
shall be as shown following paragraph 9 of this Appendix A.

       *2.     Teachers shall qualify for the Master's salary schedule column upon completion
of a Master's program or Master’s degree equivalency, except social workers shall qualify for
this column upon completion of 32 college hours of a Master's program.

       *3.     Teachers shall qualify for the M+1 5 salary schedule column upon completion
of 15 additional college or university semester hours (or the equivalent in quarter hours)
beyond a Master's degree.

       *4.      Teachers shall qualify for the M+30 salary schedule column upon completion of
30 additional college or university semester hours (or the equivalent in quarter hours) beyond a
Master's degree. A social worker with an earned Master's in social work which requires 60 hours
for graduation, a psychologist with an earned Master's degree which requires 60 hours for
graduation, or a teacher with an earned Master of Fine Arts degree which requires 60 hours for
graduation shall qualify for the M+30 column.

       *5.     Teachers shall qualify for the M+45 salary schedule column upon completion of
45 additional college or university semester hours (or the equivalent in quarter hours) beyond a
Master's Degree. A social worker with an earned Master's in social work which required 60
hours for graduation, a psychologist with an earned Master's degree which required 60 hours for
graduation or a teacher with an earned Master of Fine Arts degree which required 60 hours for
graduation shall qualify for the M+45 upon completion of 15 additional hours beyond such
Master's Degree.

       6.      The annual salary rate for a non-degree teacher who does not possess a
B.S. or M.S. equivalency, shall be $300 less than the annual salary rate of a teacher with the same
number of credited years of experience who holds a B.S. degree or M.S. equivalency.

       7.     The annual salary rate for a teacher with a Master's degree or a Master's degree
equivalency shall be the same.

       8.      If a teacher receives his/her National Board Certification, then the teacher will be
paid an additional $1,000 per year as long as the teacher maintains that certification and
remains a teacher in IPS.

       9.      If a bargaining unit member who is a school psychologist has or obtains National
Board Certification from the National School of Psychology Certification Board, then he/she will
be paid an additional $1,000 per year as long as he/she maintains that certification and remains
employed as a school psychologist in IPS.




                                                -37-
              INDIANAPOLIS PUBLIC SCHOOLS
                          SALARY SCHEDULE
                              2007/2008 Base

                  BS       MS      MS +15      MS +30   MS +45   Doctorate
  Years of
 Experience      Salary   Salary   Salary      Salary   Salary     Salary


     1           34,984   36,459   37,198      38,663   39,807      40,699
     2           36,437   37,908   38,652      40,125   41,308      42,146
     3           37,891   39,368   40,099      41,575   42,804      43,599
     4           39,347   40,817   41,557      43,033   44,304      45,064
     5           40,804   42,277   43,019      44,515   45,808      46,507
     6           42,261   43,732   44,464      45,936   47,296      47,968
     7           43,713   45,185   45,927      47,391   48,796      49,418
     8           45,166   46,643   47,378      48,849   50,296      50,872
     9           46,617   48,096   48,824      50,301   51,798      52,327
    10           48,074   49,545   50,288      51,756   53,291      53,785
    11           49,529   51,003   51,743      53,216   54,791      55,233
    12           50,985   52,458   53,194      54,667   56,288      56,696
    13           52,440   53,906   54,642      56,121   57,787      58,150
    14           54,254   55,367   56,104      57,579   59,281      59,594
    15           54,254   56,826   57,552      59,028   60,783      61,058
    16           54,254   58,273   59,007      60,486   62,287      62,509
    17           54,254   59,727   60,466      61,937   63,780      63,962
    18           54,254   61,186   61,927      63,393   65,279      65,419
    19           54,254   62,993   63,736      65,207   67,148      67,228
    20           56,130   62,993   63,736      65,207   67,148      67,228
   21-24         56,130   62,993   63,736      65,207   67,148      67,228
    25           56,571   65,384   66,123      67,616   69,622      69,649

1% Increase from 2006-2007 Schedule

2008/2009 no increase




                                   -38-
              INDIANAPOLIS PUBLIC SCHOOLS
                         SALARY SCHEDULE
                              2009/2010 Base

                BS       MS       MS +15       MS +30   MS +45   Doctorate
  Years of
 Experience    Salary   Salary     Salary      Salary   Salary     Salary


     1         35,684   37,189     37,942      39,436   40,604       41,513
     2         37,166   38,666     39,425      40,927   42,134       42,989
     3         38,648   40,155     40,901      42,407   43,661       44,471
     4         40,134   41,634     42,388      43,894   45,190       45,965
     5         41,620   43,123     43,879      45,405   46,724       47,438
     6         43,106   44,606     45,353      46,855   48,242       48,928
     7         44,588   46,089     46,845      48,339   49,772       50,406
     8         46,069   47,576     48,325      49,825   51,302       51,890
     9         47,549   49,058     49,801      51,307   52,834       53,374
    10         49,036   50,536     51,294      52,791   54,357       54,860
    11         50,519   52,023     52,777      54,280   55,886       56,338
    12         52,004   53,507     54,258      55,761   57,414       57,830
    13         53,489   54,984     55,734      57,243   58,942       59,313
    14         55,339   56,474     57,227      58,730   60,467       60,786
    15         55,339   57,962     58,703      60,209   61,998       62,279
    16         55,339   59,439     60,187      61,696   63,533       63,759
    17         55,339   60,921     61,676      63,176   65,055       65,242
    18         55,339   62,409     63,166      64,661   66,585       66,727
    19         55,339   64,253     65,011      66,511   68,491       68,572
    20         57,253   64,253     65,011      66,511   68,491       68,572
   21-24       57,253   64,253     65,011      66,511   68,491       68,572
    25         57,702   66,692     67,445      68,969   71,014       71,042

2% increase from 2007-2008 Schedule




                                   -39-
             APPENDIX B

 Opening
             Closing Date   Pay Date
   Date
06/07/2009    06/20/2009    07/03/2009
06/21/2009    07/04/2009    07/17/2009
07/05/2009    07/18/2009    07/31/2009
07/19/2009    08/01/2009    08/14/2009
08/02/2009    08/15/2009    08/28/2009
08/16/2009    08/29/2009    09/11/2009
08/30/2009    09/12/2009    09/25/2009
09/13/2009    09/26/2009    10/09/2009
09/27/2009    10/10/2009    10/23/2009
10/11/2009    10/24/2009    11/06/2009
10/25/2009    11/07/2009    11/20/2009
11/08/2009    11/21/2009    12/04/2009
11/22/2009    12/05/2009    12/18/2009
12/06/2009    12/19/2009    01/01/2010
12/20/2009    01/02/2010    01/15/2010
01/03/2010    01/16/2010    01/29/2010
01/17/2010    01/30/2010    02/12/2010
01/31/2010    02/13/2010    02/26/2010
02/14/2010    02/27/2010    03/12/2010
02/28/2010    03/13/2010    03/26/2010
03/14/2010    03/27/2010    04/09/2010
03/28/2010    04/10/2010    04/23/2010
04/11/2010    04/24/2010    05/07/2010
04/25/2010    05/08/2010    05/21/2010
05/09/2010    05/22/2010    06/04/2010
05/23/2010    06/05/2010    06/18/2010
06/06/2010    06/19/2010    07/02/2010
06/20/2010    07/03/2010    07/16/2010
07/04/2010    07/17/2010    07/30/2010
07/18/2010    07/31/2010    08/13/2010




                 -40-
                                      APPENDIX C

                      COMPANIES AUTHORIZED FOR PAYROLL
                      DEDUCTIONS TAX-DEFERRED ANNUITIES/
                         TAX- DEFERRED MUTUAL FUNDS

As of July 1, 2008, the following companies are authorized for payroll deductions to unit
members as provided in Article II, Section 3:
AIG General
                                              GALIC
                                              Horace Mann
Financial Network                             ING Financial
First Investors
                                              MetLife
                                              One America
                                              VALIC


Additional companies may be added only upon authorization in writing from at least five
percent (5%) of the unit members.

Any company that does not complete the hold harmless or other mandatory agreements
does not qualify as a 403(b) vendor.




                                            -41-
                                       Appendix D


                   Teacher Evaluation Guidelines and Timeline


1.   Evaluation Frequency

     The Board requires that all non-permanent (1 or 2 years of teaching experiences in

     IPS) and semi-permanent teachers (3 to 5 years of continuous IPS employment)

     receive an annual comprehensive evaluation utilizing the evaluation instruments

     found with this Appendix. Permanent teachers (with more than five (5) years

     experience in IPS) shall be subject to a comprehensive evaluation only if: (1) the

     teacher is on a Performance Improvement Plan; (2) the teacher is due for an

     evaluation under the four (4) year cycle established by the school system; (3) there

     is documented reasonable cause that an evaluation is warranted.



2.   Evaluator

     The primary responsibility for the evaluation of the work of any teacher shall rest

     with his/her primary evaluator or designee. Certified ancillary staff members will

     have as their evaluators the persons designated as their supervisors. A TOSA

     (Teachers on Special Assignment) shall be evaluated by his/her supervisor. If it is

     appropriate for another supervisor/administrator to be designated as the primary

     evaluator of a certified staff person, that person shall be informed in writing of the

     name and position of such evaluator (and reasons) by September 15th of the

     traditional school year calendar and August 15th for the Year Round School

     Calendar. Changes in assignment of the primary evaluator shall not occur without

     notification to the teacher involved.


                                             -42-
     Itinerant certified staff members, who serve more than one school, shall be

     evaluated by the designated supervisor at the location where the teacher spends

     the majority of assigned time. If observation reports are completed by supervisors in

     other schools to which the staff member is assigned, then those reports shall be

     included in the evaluation file.



3.   Evaluation Notification

     By September 15th of the traditional school year and August 15th for the Year

     Round school year, each certified staff person shall receive notification of the

     evaluation instrument, including indicators and the rubric, that will be used for the

     evaluation, the name of the evaluator, and the process to be used for the

     evaluation.

4.   Professional Growth Plan/Goals
     Each certified staff member is required to write a minimum of two individual

     professional growth plan/goals (one must be from Domain 3) that focus on

     personal professional growth. They shall be related to district/ and/ or

     school/student achievement. They shall be subject to mutual agreement between

     the teacher and the evaluator. All Professional Growth Plan/Goals are due to the

     primary evaluator or designee by October 15th for the traditional school year and

     September 15th for the Year Round school year.



5.   Pre-Observation Conference

     A Pre-Observation Conference is required before an announced formal observation

     can be conducted. The Pre-Observation Conference shall be scheduled at least
                                      -43-
one (1) working day prior to the observation. The Teacher's Responsibilities for the

Pre-Observation Conference shall include but not be limited to the following:

       a.   Ask questions to clarify any expectations or procedures;

       b.   Be prepared to discuss with the evaluator the "Teacher Planning &

            Preparation Protocol" document questions (5 questions);

       c.   Provide any additional evidence or artifacts related to the lesson to be

            observed;

       d.   Verify the date and time of the announced observation.



The Evaluator's responsibilities for the Pre-Observation Conference shall include,

but not be limited to the following:

       a.   Schedule the pre-observation conference time and place;

       b.   Provide an opportunity during the conference for the teacher to ask

            questions to clarify expectations;

       c.   Discuss the "Teacher Planning & Preparation Protocol" document

            questions and document evidence and responses provided by the

            teacher.

       d.   Verify the date and time of the announced observation.




                                       -44-
6.   Formal Classroom Observations - First Semester

     Certified staff undergoing a comprehensive evaluation shall be observed in-class a

     minimum of once per semester. Observation of ancillary staff shall be based on

     appropriate work responsibilities. The first formal observation shall be scheduled by

     mutual agreement between the teacher and the evaluator. The formal observation

     shall be no less than thirty (30) minutes in length. An observation that takes place

     during testing or similar activity that does not demonstrate teacher performance shall

     not be considered a formal observation for the purpose of a comprehensive

     evaluation. Nothing prohibits the primary evaluator from making additional

     observations. All monitoring of work shall be done openly and with full knowledge of

     the teacher.



     Any teacher being evaluated may request a second observation by the primary

     evaluator if such a request is made within five (5) days after the first observation.

     The second observation shall be conducted no sooner than five days after the

     request but no later than December 1 in the first semester. The observation shall

     be no less than thirty (30) minutes in length.



     A copy of the observations notes shall be given to the teacher at the end of the

     formal observation or no later than the end of that teacher work day.



7.   Post Observation Conference

     The evaluator and the teacher shall meet within three (3) school days following the


                                            -45-
formal observation. This timeline shall be adhered to unless an illness or an

emergency justifies a delay. The teacher is responsible for bringing the following

items:

         a.   Completed Teacher Reflection Sheet - Form C (strongly recommended);

         b.   Highlighted Component Summary Sheet - Form D for Domains -1, 2, 3

              and 4;

         c.   Any other pertinent artifacts which support the evaluation components.



The evaluator is responsible for bringing to the Post-Observation Conference the

         following items:

         a.   Planning and Preparation Rubric -Form A-1;

         b.   Classroom Observation Record Form B-1;

         c.   Professional Responsibility Form C-1;

         d.   Highlighted Component Summary Sheet - Form D for Domains 1, 2, 3

              and 4.

During the Post Observation Conference, the evaluator and the teacher will discuss

and review the data recorded during the observation and any other documented

evidence collected that is related to the performance criteria. Any such evidence

must have been collected openly and with full knowledge of the teacher. The

teacher shall also have the opportunity to provide any additional data during the

conference, and such data shall become part of the teacher's evaluation file. After

reviewing all documentation, the primary evaluator and the teacher shall discuss the

teacher's performance on the Observation Summary Form. - Form D-1. The

primary evaluator shall complete the evidence checklist, the Summary, and the


                                      -46-
     Suggestions for Future Practices on Form D-1.



8.   Mid-Year Evaluation

     The Mid-Year Summative Evaluation for any certified staff person undergoing a

     comprehensive evaluation must be completed by the last working day of

     December. Using the district's Mid-Year Summative Evaluation Form found within

     this Appendix, the evaluator should note key evidence where appropriate and

     finalize the overall rating for each of the four domains.



     If any domain is deemed unsatisfactory on the Mid-Year Summative evaluation, the

     primary evaluator has the responsibility and is expected to do the following:

            a.   Notify the teacher of his/her performance status which constitutes

                 unsatisfactory performance.

            b.   Give recommendations both oral and written to support teachers whose

                 performance is unsatisfactory.

     A teacher whose level of performance is deemed to be unsatisfactory has the

     responsibility, and is expected, to request help and make an effort to improve

     his/her performance.



9.   Formal Classroom Observation - Second Semester

     The second semester formal observation can be unannounced. The observation

     shall be no less than thirty (30) minutes in length. An observation that takes place

     during testing or similar activity that does not demonstrate teacher performance

     shall not be considered a formal observation for the purpose of a comprehensive


                                           -47-
      evaluation. A copy of the observations notes shall be given to the teacher at the end

      of the observation or no later than the end of that teacher work day.



      Any teacher being evaluated may request a second observation by the primary

      evaluator during the second semester if such a request is made within five (5) days

      after the first observation. The second observation shall be conducted no sooner

      than five days after the request.



10.   Post Observation Conference - Second Semester

      The evaluator and the teacher shall meet within three (3) school days following the

      observation. This timeline shall be adhered to unless an illness or an emergency

      justifies a delay.

      The teacher is responsible for bringing the following items:

             a.   Completed Teacher Reflection Sheet - Form C (strongly recommended);

             b.   Highlighted Component Summary sheets for Domains 2 and 3. - Form

                  D;

             c.   Any other pertinent artifacts which support any other domain.



      The evaluator is responsible for bringing to the Post-Observation Conference the

             following items:

             a.   Planning and Preparation Rubric form - Form A-1;

             b.   Classroom Observation Record form -Form B-1;

             c.   Professional Responsibility form - Form C-1;

             d.   Highlighted Component Summary sheet for Domains 2 and 3. - Form D.


                                           -48-
      During the Post Observation Conference, the evaluator and the teacher will discuss

      and review the data recorded during the observation and any other documented

      evidence collected that is related to the performance criteria. Any such evidence

      must have been collected openly and with full knowledge of the teacher. The teacher

      shall also have the opportunity to provide any additional data during conference, and

      such data shall become part of the teacher's evaluation file. After reviewing all

      documentation, the primary evaluator and the teacher shall discuss the teacher's

      performance on the Observation Summary Form. - Form D-1. The primary evaluator

      shall complete the evidence checklist, the Summary, and the Suggestions for Future

      Practices on Form D-1.



11.   Unsatisfactory Evaluation

      If the primary evaluator determines that a Final Summative Evaluation meets the

      criteria for unsatisfactory performance, the Final Summative Evaluation must be

      completed by March 1st.



12.   Second Evaluator

      If a teacher's performance is deemed by the primary evaluator to be unsatisfactory,

      a second evaluation shall be made by a person other than the primary evaluator,

      the second evaluator to be determined by Elementary and Secondary Division in

      collaboration with the Human Resources Division. In all other instances when a

      teacher desires an evaluation by a second evaluator, the request for such second

      evaluator shall be made in writing within six (6) teaching days after the receipt of the

      summative evaluation report. The teacher shall be informed of the name and


                                            -49-
      position of the second evaluator twenty-four (24) hours prior to the first observation

      by the second evaluator. The second evaluator shall not be allowed to see the

      observation and mid-year report forms prepared by the primary evaluator but shall

      review the goals agreed upon by the teacher and the primary evaluator through the

      goal-setting procedure. The second evaluator shall conduct a minimum of two

      observations, each a minimum of thirty (30) minutes in duration, prior to preparation

      of the summative evaluation report. The second evaluator shall determine the level

      of performance for each Domain observed but is not required to make a

      recommendation. If the two levels of performance in any Domain are inconsistent

      on the summative evaluations, the determination of level of performance for the

      Domain shall be made by the Chief of Human Resources Division in collaboration

      with the Elementary and Secondary Divisions.



13.      Performance Improvement Plan

      If any teacher has unsatisfactory performance in Domain 1 or 4, the teacher shall

      be placed on a Performance Improvement Plan. The Performance Improvement

      Plan shall be written by the teacher, primary evaluator, and an IEA representative

      or appropriate third party if requested.



      The teacher and primary evaluator shall complete the PIP by May 15th for

      implementation for the following school year unless an emergency or illness

      justifies a delay. If it is necessary that a teacher with a PIP be reassigned, the

      plan is to be implemented at the new assignment. If a teacher does not reach

      “Basic” performance at the completion of a one-year Performance Improvement


                                            -50-
      Plan, the evaluator may recommend non-renewal of contract, completion of a

      second PIP, or reassignment to another of the teacher's areas of certification in

      which he or she has experience in the IPS system if such a vacancy exists.



14.   Non-renewal of Contract

      If any teacher's unsatisfactory performance is in Domain 2 or 3, the primary

      evaluator may recommend non-renewal of the contract.



15.   Final Comprehensive Evaluation

      Each teacher on comprehensive evaluation shall receive a summative evaluation

      report on the Final Summative Evaluation Form as provided within Appendix D that

      is the final assessment for the year of the teacher's performance. No matter or

      situation not previously discussed with the teacher shall be placed in the written

      evaluation report. A summative conference shall be held to review and discuss the

      summative evaluation report. The summative conference (at which time the teacher

      will be presented with the completed summative evaluation report) shall be held no

      later than March 1 in the case of unsatisfactory performance, and recommendation

      for termination or PIP or May 31 in the case of satisfactory performance.



      No evaluation form shall be placed in the teacher's personnel file until the evaluator

      and the teacher have fully discussed it. In any case in which the teacher is rated

      unsatisfactory in any area, appropriate documentation shall be provided. At this

      conference the teacher and the evaluator shall discuss the professional growth plan

      accomplishment. The teacher and evaluator shall sign and date the form at the


                                           -51-
      BDDB01 5367907v1
conclusion of the meeting. This signature does not indicate that the teacher agrees

with its content but merely that the teacher has seen and discussed the form. A

copy of the completed evaluation form shall be given to the teacher at the time of

the meeting described herein. The teacher may attach a memorandum to the

evaluation form concerning its contents.




                                     -52-
                                       APPENDIX E

                                   GRIEVANCE FORM

             Indianapolis Education Association/Indianapolis Public Schools

To: Administrator                                       Date Filed: __________________

Grievant’s Name: __________________                 School/Location: __________________

Date of Occurrence: ____________________

Date of Step One Informal Meeting With Supervisor:




Result of Step One Informal Meeting with Supervisor:




Article(s) and Section(s) of Agreement Grieved:




Nature of Grievance (including what was done that violated the Agreement, who did it
and when):




Relief Sought (state the specific relief sought):




Signed:_______________________

Revised: 3/06



                                             -53-
