                                                                                            May 18, 2017




   Proposed Settlement Agreement with Montgomery County Public Schools
  The MCEA bargaining team is happy to announce a proposed settlement agreement with
  Montgomery County Public Schools for the School Years 2018 – 2020. This agreement
  includes:
      general wage and step increases
      a three-year freeze on healthcare premium cost shifts to employees
      increased autonomy around group managed time

  To become final, the proposed agreement requires:
      approval by MCEA membership
      approval by the Montgomery County Board of Education

  The MCEA Bargaining Team, Board of Directors, and Representative Assembly recommend
  that the membership vote ‘YES’ in favor of the proposal.

Read on for more highlights of the proposed settlement…
Further highlights of the settlement include:
   1. Three-year guarantee of no healthcare premium shifts to employees. Healthcare cost increases are
      limited to small increases in co-pays for office visits, pharmaceuticals, emergency room visits, and
      hospitalizations. New coverage for previously excluded dental implants (not in contract language but
      will be in the plan description from the healthcare provider).
   2. 1% General Wage Increase, effective July 1, 2017; contract reopener in second and third years of the
      agreement for General Wage Increase, as well as continuation of negotiations for “make up steps.”
   3. Step increase for all eligible employees, effective July 1, 2017.
   4. New $15.00 stipend rate.
   5. Creation of a contributory family leave bank to provide paid time off for the care of family members
      with serious illnesses, with MCPS seeding the first 200 days to the fund.
   6. The parties agree to examine and make recommendations as to how to best recruit and retain highly
      qualified teachers at high need schools. The Board commits $1.7 million for piloting the
      recommendations agreed to by the parties. If the parties cannot agree on recommendations for a
      pilot, MCEA and MCPS will meet to negotiate how the money could be used to support high need
      schools.
   7. The Board agrees to provide 2 days of paid leave to the mother for the birth of a child.
   8. Moving assistance will be provided for unit members changing schools. Entire assignment must change.
   9. MCPS will allocate $75,000 to jointly commission a study of individual and collaborative planning time
      that will inform future practices in MCPS.
   10. For school leadership teams, roles should be rotated in order to build and share leadership; Interested
       staff can observe ILT meetings;

   11. Group Managed Time: teams, departments, and committees can determine how (e.g., agendas,
       templates, etc.), when, and where the work will be accomplished.
   12. Creation of a Joint Professional Learning Committee (JPLC) replacing the “Professional Learning
       Cross-functional Team.” JPLC will help shape a system-wide vision for on-going & future professional
       learning, discuss and monitor adult learning in MCPS, and make recommendations to the superintendent
       to enhance instruction, and improve attraction and retention of a talented workforce.
   13. Maximum time for meetings after school reduced from 3 hours to 2.5 hours per month.

   14. MCPS and MCEA shall engage in discussion about any ESSA implementation matters that impact our
       working conditions.
   15. In the event existing structures intended to resolve climate issues are not successful at resolving a
       specific situation, MCEA and MCPS shall meet to create a specific plan to address and resolve the
       situation.
   16. Any change to a student’s behavior management plan will be communicated to all impacted teachers.
   17. Unit members cannot be required to spend personal funds for classroom materials/supplies.
   18. For 12-month employees: Increased flexibility for teleworking during emergency closings of central
       office; ability to attend to personal business (short durations) without using leave for absences from their
       work site.

For Substitutes:
   1. 1% increase for all rates.
   2. Professional Development – Subs will be compensated for required trainings at short-term hourly rate;
      Annual Training Day language reinstated.
   3. Freedom of access during a sub assignment – Subs will be provided access to classroom, lounge,
      workrooms, restrooms, and interior hallway gates
   4. Subs cannot be disciplined (removal from sub lists) without proper cause.

For Home and Hospital Teachers:
   1. 1% increase for all rates.
   2. Bonus for HHT-Work for 315 hours, $450 bonus. Work 175 hours, $250. Done by semester.
   3. Will be compensated for required trainings at regular hourly rate.
   4. Joint recognition of importance of interaction and communication of HHT and classroom teacher and
      recognizing the current practices/communication norms.
