                         Employee Handbook
                             2012-2013


Table of contents
Introduction
Employee handbook receipt
District information
   Description of the district
   District map
   Mission statement
   District goals and objectives
   Board of trustees
   Board meeting schedule for 2010-2011
   Administration
   School calendar
   Helpful contacts
   School directory
Employment
   Equal employment opportunity
   Job vacancy announcements
   Employment after retirement
   Contract and noncontract employment
   Searches and alcohol and drug testing
   First aid and CPR certification
   Reassignments and transfers
   Workload and work schedules
   Notification of parents regarding qualifications
   Outside employment and tutoring
   Performance evaluation
   Employee involvement
   Staff development
Compensation and benefits
   Salaries, wages, and stipends
   Paychecks
   Automatic payroll deposit
   Payroll deductions
   Overtime compensation
   Travel expense reimbursement
   Health, dental, and life insurance
   Supplemental insurance benefits
   Cafeteria plan benefits (Section 125)
   Workers’ compensation insurance
   Unemployment compensation insurance
   Teacher retirement
   Other benefit programs
Leaves and absences
   Personal leave
   Sick leave
   Local leave
   Temporary disability
   Family and medical leave
   Workers’ compensation benefits
   Assault leave
   Bereavement leave
   Jury duty
   Other court appearances
   Military leave
Employee relations and communications
   Employee recognition and appreciation
   District communications
Complaints and grievances
Employee conduct and welfare
   Standards of conduct
   Harassment
   Harassment of students
   Drug-abuse prevention
   Reporting suspected child abuse
   Fraud and financial impropriety
   Conflict of interest
   Gifts and favors
   Associations and political activities
   Safety
   Tobacco used
   Employee arrests and convictions
   Possession of firearms and weapons
   Visitors in the workplace
   Copyrighted materials
   Computer use and data management
   Asbestos management plan
   Pest control treatment
   Other topics
General procedures
   Bad weather closing
   Emergencies
   Purchasing procedures
   Name and address changes
     Personnel records
     Building use
Termination of employment
     Resignations
     Dismissal or nonrenewal of contract employees
     Dismissal of noncontract employees
     Exit interviews and procedures
     Reports to State Board for Educator Certification
     Reports concerning court-ordered withholding
Student issues
     Equal educational opportunities
     Student records
     Parent and student complaints
     Administering medication to students
     Dietary supplements
     Psychotropic drugs
     Student discipline
     Student attendance
     Hazing
Appendix
Index


Introduction
The purpose of this handbook is to provide information that will help with questions and
pave the way for a successful year. Not all district policies and procedures are included.
Those that are have been summarized. Suggestions for additions and improvements to
this handbook are welcome and may be sent to James Rice.

This handbook is neither a contract nor a substitute for the official district policy manual.
Nor is it intended to alter the at-will status of noncontract employees in any way. Rather,
it is a guide to and a brief explanation of district policies and procedures related to
employment. These policies and procedures can change at any time; these changes shall
supersede any handbook provisions that are not compatible with the change. For more
information, employees may refer to the policy codes that are associated with handbook
topics, confer with their supervisor, or call the appropriate district office. District policies
can be accessed in the administration office.
District information
Description of the district
Northside Independent School District is a public school district based in
Wilbarger County. The district is composed of one campus, which serves grades
K-12



District map




Mission statement
 The Northside Independent School District will educate, lead, develop, and mold our
young men and women to be leaders, stakeholders, and vital contributors to the
community, state and United States of America. It is the job of our district to build a
strong foundation in our youth. This group of individuals is our future, and we will take
every measure to give them the best tools and skills to build a better tomorrow.
Policy AE
District goals and objectives
Goal 1: To reach the state performance standards for all students groups as measured by
the Texas Academic Knowledge and Skills indicator system by demonstrating exemplary
performance I Reading, Writing, English Language Arts, Mathematics, Science, and
Social Studies by the April testing dates.

Goal 2: To recruit and retain highly qualified staff so that students receive the best
possible instruction and instructional methods which reflect research based strategies in
order to maximize student achievement.

Goal 3: To maintain School campuses which are safe and orderly environments
conducive to learning.

Goal 4: To provide technology which will be implemented and used to enhance student
learning, instructional management, staff development, and administration.

Goal 5: To develop committees to involve parents, community members, and
stakeholders to participate in daily routines of school life.

Goal 5: The district will work to enhance dropout prevention efforts so all students will
obtain a high school diploma.

Board of trustees
Policies BA, BAA, BBA, BBB, BBE, BE, BEC, BED

Texas law grants the board of trustees the power to govern and oversee the management
of the district’s schools. The board is the policy-making body within the district and has
overall responsibility for the curriculum, school taxes, annual budget, employment of the
superintendent and other professional staff, and facilities. The board has complete and
final control over school matters within limits established by state and federal law and
regulations.

The board of trustees is elected by the citizens of the district to represent the commu-
nity’s commitment to a strong educational program for the district’s children. Trustees
are elected semi-annually and serve four-year terms. Trustees serve without com-
pensation, must be registered voters, and must reside in the district.

Current board members include:
Jonathon Voelkel
Johnny White
Nathan Christian
Michael King
Raymond Smith
Wayne Ward
The board usually meets the third Thursday of the Month at 6:30 pm In the event that
large attendance is anticipated; the board may meet at the High School Gym. Special
meetings may be called when necessary. A written notice of regular and special meetings
will be posted the central office at least 72 hours before the scheduled meeting time. The
written notice will show the date, time, place, and subjects of each meeting. In
emergencies, a meeting may be held with a two-hour notice.

All meetings are open to the public. In certain circumstances, Texas law permits the
board to go into a closed session from which the public and others are excluded. Closed
session may occur for such things as discussing prospective gifts or donations, real-prop-
erty acquisition, certain personnel matters including employee complaints, security mat-
ters, student discipline, or consulting with attorneys regarding pending litigation.


Administration
Superintendent---------------James Rice
High School Principal ------Cindy Riggins

School calendar (see appendix)



Employment
Equal employment opportunity
Policy DAA

The Northside ISD does not discriminate against any employee or applicant for
employment because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, military
status, or on any other basis prohibited by law. Employment decisions will be made on
the basis of each applicant’s job qualifications, experience, and abilities.

Employees with questions or concerns about discrimination on the basis of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, age, or military status should contact the superintendent
who serves as the district’s Title IX coordinator. Employees with questions or concerns
about discrimination on the basis of a disability or on any of the basis listed above should
contact should contact James Rice.

Job vacancy announcements
Policy DC

Announcements of job vacancies by position and location are distributed on a regular
basis and posted at the central administration building, campus offices, and on the
district’s Web site.
Employment after retirement
Individuals receiving retirement benefits from the Teacher Retirement System (TRS) may
be employed in certain positions on a full- or part-time basis without affecting their bene-
fits, according to TRS rules and state law. Service retirees who retire before May 31 may
return to work in a Texas public school without a reduction in benefits one full calendar
month after the retirement date, provided they meet specific conditions. Retiring
employees should consult TRS officials about conditions and restrictions on employment
after retirement. Retirees may work in the following capacities without a loss of
retirement benefits:

   As a principal or assistant principal or teacher in an acute shortage area on a full-
    time basis, if appropriately certified and following a 12-month break in service.
    Retirees that retired under early age or disability provisions are excluded.
   As a full-time bus driver (early age and disability retirees excluded).
   As a substitute at no more than the established daily substitute pay rate. (Individuals
    receiving disability retirement benefits may not work for more than 90 days in a
    school year.)
   On a half-time or less basis during any month. Half-time employment cannot exceed
    the lesser of 50 percent of the position’s full-time load or 92 hours in a month.
   On a full-time basis during a six-month period during a school year, provided that
    this is their only employment in a Texas public school. Individuals who retire in
    August may begin employment in October of the school year following their
    retirement.

Under this last provision, retirees must submit annual written notice to TRS by the last
day of the first month of full employment to avoid a disruption of benefits. Working any
part of a month counts as a full month.

Other restrictions apply when a person has retired because of a disability. Individuals
retiring because of a disability should contact TRS for details about employment restric-
tions.

Shortage areas. Certain retirees may return to work on a full-time basis as a principal or
assistant principal or teacher in an acute shortage area without a reduction in their TRS
annuity benefits. Acute teaching shortage areas are determined by the board based on
Commissioner of Education guidelines. When filling acute shortage area positions, the
district must give hiring preference to certified applicants who are not retirees. To be eli-
gible for full TRS benefits a retiree must meet the following criteria:

   Have not been subject to a reduction in benefits for retirement at an early age or
    retired under disability provisions
   Have a 12-month continuous break in public school service since retirement
   Be appropriately certified for the position in the applicable school year
Employees can contact TRS for additional information by calling 800-223-8778 or 512-
542-6400. TRS information is also available on the Web (www.trs.state.tx.us).

Contract and noncontract employment
Policies DC, DCA, DCB, DCC, DCD, DCE

State law requires the district to employ all full-time professional employees in positions
requiring a certificate from State Board for Educator Certification (SBEC) and nurses
under probationary, term, or continuing contracts. Employees in all other positions are
employed at-will or by a contract that is not subject to the procedures for nonrenewal or
termination under Chapter 21 of the Texas Education Code. The paragraphs that follow
provide a general description of the employment arrangements used by the district.

Probationary contracts. Nurses and full-time professional employees new to the district
and employed in positions requiring SBEC certification must receive a probationary con-
tract during their first year of employment. Former employees who are hired after at least
a two-year lapse in district employment also may be employed by probationary contract.
Probationary contracts are one-year contracts. The probationary period for those who
have been employed as a teacher in public education for at least five of the eight years
preceding employment with the district may not exceed one school year. For those with
less experience, the probationary period will be three school years (i.e., three one-year
contracts) with an optional fourth school year if the board determines it is doubtful
whether a term or continuing contract should be given.

Term and continuing contracts. Full-time professionals employed in positions requiring
certification and nurses will be employed by term or continuing contracts after they have
successfully completed the probationary period. Teachers are employed by term
contracts. Campus principals and central office administrators are employed under term
contracts. The terms and conditions of employment are detailed in the contract and
employment policies. All employees will receive a copy of their contract and
employment policies.


Noncertified professional and administrative employees. Employees in professional
and administrative positions that do not require SBEC certification (such as noninstruc-
tional administrators) are not employed by contract. Employment is not for any specified
term and may be terminated at any time by either the employee or the district.
Paraprofessional and auxiliary employees. All paraprofessional and auxiliary employees,
regardless of certification, are employed at will and not by contract. Employment is not
for any specified term and may be terminated at any time by either the employee or the
district.
Searches and alcohol and drug testing
Policy DHE

Noninvestigatory searches in the workplace, including accessing an employee’s desk, file
cabinets, or work area to obtain information needed for usual business purposes may
occur when an employee is unavailable. Therefore, employees are hereby notified that
they have no legitimate expectation of privacy in those places. In addition, the district
reserves the right to conduct searches when there is reasonable cause to believe a search
will uncover evidence of work-related misconduct. Such an investigatory search may
include drug and alcohol testing if the suspected violation relates to drug or alcohol use.
The district may search the employee, the employee’s personal items, work areas,
including district-owned computers, lockers, and private vehicles parked on district
premises or work sites or used in district business.

Employees required to have a commercial driver’s license. Any employee whose duties
require a commercial driver’s license (CDL) is subject to drug and alcohol testing. This
includes all drivers who operate a motor vehicle designed to transport 16 or more people,
counting the driver; drivers of large vehicles; or drivers of vehicles used in the
transportation of hazardous materials. Teachers, coaches, or other employees who
primarily perform duties other than driving are subject to testing requirements when their
duties include driving.

Drug testing will be conducted before an individual assumes driving responsibilities.
Alcohol and drug tests will be conducted if reasonable suspicion exists, at random, when
an employee returns to duty after engaging in prohibited conduct, and as a follow-up
measure. Testing may be conducted following accidents. Return-to-duty and follow-up
testing will be conducted if an employee who has violated the prohibited alcohol conduct
standards or tested positive for alcohol or drugs is allowed to return to duty.

All employees required to have a CDL or who is otherwise subject to alcohol and drug
testing will receive a copy of the district’s policy, the testing requirements, and detailed
information on alcohol and drug abuse and the availability of assistance programs.
Employees with questions or concerns relating to alcohol and drug policies and related
educational material should contact James Rice.

First aid, CPR, and AED certification
Policy DBA

Nurses, physical education teachers, marching band directors, coaches, athletic trainers,
or chief sponsors of an extracurricular athletic activity (including cheerleading) that is
sponsored or sanctioned by the district or University Interscholastic League (UIL) must
maintain and submit to the district proof of current certification in first aid,
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), and the use of an automated external defibrillator
(AED). Certification must be issued by the American Red Cross, the American Heart
Association, or another organization that provides equivalent training and certification.
Reassignments and transfers
Policy DK

All personnel are subject to assignment and reassignment by the superintendent or desig-
nee when the superintendent or designee determines that the assignment or reassignment
is in the best interest of the district. Reassignment is a transfer to another position,
department, or facility that does not necessitate a change in the employment contract.
Campus reassignments must be approved by the principal at the receiving campus except
when reassignments are due to enrollment shifts or program changes. Extracurricular or
supplemental duty assignments may be reassigned at any time unless an extracurricular or
supplemental duty assignment is part of a dual-assignment contract. Employees who
object to a reassignment may follow the district process for employee complaints as
outlined in this handbook and district policy DGBA (Local).

An employee with the required qualifications for a position may request a transfer to
another campus or department. A written request for transfer must be completed and
signed by the employee and the employee’s supervisor. A teacher requesting a transfer to
another campus before the school year begins must submit their request by March 30th.
Requests for transfer during the school year will be considered only when the change will
not adversely affect students and after a replacement has been found. All transfer requests
will be coordinated by the central administration office and must be approved by the
receiving supervisor.

Workload and work schedules
Policy DL

Professional employees. Professional and administrative employees are exempt from
overtime pay and are employed on a 10-, 11-, or 12-month basis, according to the work
schedules set by the district. A school calendar is adopted each year designating the work
schedule for teachers and all school holidays. Notice of work schedules including
required days of service and scheduled holidays will be distributed each school year.

Classroom teachers will have planning periods for instructional preparation, including
conferences. The schedule of planning periods is set at the campus level but must provide
at least 450 minutes within each two-week period in blocks not less than 45 minutes.
Teachers and librarians are entitled to a duty-free lunch period of at least 30 minutes. The
district may require teachers to supervise students during lunch one day a week when no
other personnel are available.

Paraprofessional and auxiliary employees. Support employees are employed at will
and will be notified of the required duty days, holidays, and hours of work for their posi-
tion on an annual basis. Paraprofessional and auxiliary employees are not exempt from
overtime and are not authorized to work in excess of their assigned schedule without
prior approval from their supervisor.
Notification of parents regarding qualifications
Policy DK, EHBD

In schools receiving Title I funds, the district is required by the No Child Left Behind Act
(NCLB) to notify parents at the beginning of each school year that they may request
information regarding the professional qualifications of their child’s teacher. NCLB also
requires that parents be notified if their child has been assigned, or taught for four or
more consecutive weeks by, a teacher who is not highly qualified.

Texas law also requires that parents be notified if their child is assigned for more than 30
consecutive days to a teacher who does not hold an appropriate teaching certificate. This
notice is not required if parental notification under NCLB is sent. Inappropriately certi-
fied or uncertified teachers include individuals serving with an emergency permit
(including individuals waiting to take the EXCET exam) or individuals who do not hold
any certificate or permit. No later than the 30th instructional day after the date of assign-
ment the superintendent or designee will send a written notice to parents. Information
relating to teacher certification will be made available to the public upon request.

Employees who have questions about their certification status can call the central office.


Outside employment and tutoring
Policy DBF

Employees should not accept outside employment or engage in other activities for profit
that would interfere with their district employment.

Performance evaluation
Policy DN, DNA, DNB

Evaluation of an employee’s job performance is a continuous process that focuses on
improvement. Performance evaluation is based on an employee’s assigned job duties and
other job-related criteria. All employees will participate in the evaluation process with
their assigned supervisor at least annually. Written evaluations will be completed on
forms approved by the district. Reports, correspondence, and memoranda also can be
used to document performance information. All employees will receive a copy of their
written evaluation, have a performance conference with their supervisor, and get the
opportunity to respond to the evaluation.

Employee involvement
Policy BQA, BQB

At both the campus and district levels, Northside ISD offers opportunities for input in
matters that affect employees and influences the instructional effectiveness of the district.
As part of the district’s planning and decision-making process, employees are elected to
serve on district- or campus-level advisory committees. Plans and detailed information
about the shared decision-making process are available in each campus office or from the
central administration office.

Staff development
Policy DMA

Staff development activities are organized to meet the needs of employees and the
district. Staff development for instructional personnel is predominantly campus-based,
related to achieving campus performance objectives, addressed in the campus improve-
ment plan, and approved by a campus-level advisory committee. Staff development for
noninstructional personnel is designed to meet specific licensing requirements (e.g., bus
drivers) and continued employee skill development.

Individuals holding renewable SBEC certificates are responsible for obtaining the
required training hours and maintaining appropriate documentation.
Compensation and benefits
Salaries, wages, and stipends
Policy DEA

Employees are paid in accordance with administrative guidelines and a pay structure
established for each position. The district’s pay plans are reviewed by the administration
each year and adjusted as needed. All district positions are classified as exempt or nonex-
empt according to federal law. Professional and administrative employees are generally
classified as exempt and are paid monthly salaries. They are not entitled to overtime com-
pensation. Other employees are generally classified as nonexempt and are paid based on
hourly wages or salary and receive compensatory time or overtime pay for each overtime
hour worked beyond 40 in a workweek.

All employees will receive written notice of their pay and work schedules before the start
of each school year. Classroom teachers, full-time librarians, full-time nurses, and full-
time counselors will be paid no less than the minimum state salary schedule. Contract
employees who perform extracurricular or supplemental duties may be paid a stipend in
addition to their salary according to the district’s extra-duty pay schedule.

Employees should contact Donna Lee for more information about the district’s pay
schedules or their own pay.

Paychecks
All professional and salaried employees are paid monthly. All pay will be transferred
through electronic deposit to an employee’s designated bank account. Pay stubs will not
be released to any person other than the district employee named on the check without
the employee’s written authorization.

An employee’s payroll statement contains detailed information including deductions,
withholding information, and the amount of leave accumulated. The schedule of pay
dates for the 2010-2011 school year follows:

                                      September 26
                                       October 26
                                      November 26
                                      December 21
                                       January 25
                                      February 26
                                        March 26
                                         April 26
                                         May 24
                                         June 26
                                          July26
                                        August 26
Payroll deductions
Policy CFEA

Automatic payroll deductions for the Teacher Retirement System of Texas (TRS) and
federal income tax are required for all full-time employees. Medicare tax deductions also
are required for all employees hired after March 31, 1986. Temporary and part-time
employees who are not eligible for TRS membership must have their Social Security con-
tributions deducted.

Other payroll deductions employees may elect include deductions for the employee’s
share of premiums for health, dental, life, and vision insurance; annuities; and higher
education savings plans. Employees also may request payroll deduction for payment of
membership dues to professional organizations. Salary deductions are automatically
made for unauthorized or unpaid leave.

Overtime compensation
Policy DEA

The district compensates overtime for nonexempt employees in accordance with federal
wage and hour laws. Only nonexempt employees (hourly employees and paraprofessional
employees) are entitled to overtime compensation. Nonexempt employees are not
authorized to work beyond their normal work schedule without advance approval from
their supervisor.

Overtime is legally defined as all hours worked in excess of 40 hours in a work week and
is not measured by the day or by the employee’s regular work schedule. Nonexempt
employees that are paid on a salary basis are paid for a 40-hour workweek and do not
earn additional pay unless they work more than 40 hours.

Employees may be compensated for overtime at time-and-a-half rate with compensatory
time off (comp time) or direct pay. The following applies to all nonexempt employees:

   Employees can accumulate up to 60 hours of compensatory time.
   Comp time must be used in the duty year that it is earned.
   Use of comp time may be at the employee’s request with supervisor approval as
    workload permits.
   An employee may be required to use comp time before using any other available
    paid leave (e.g., sick, personal, vacation).
   Weekly time records will be maintained on all nonexempt employees for the
    purpose of wage and salary administration.
Travel expense reimbursement
Policy DEE

Before any travel expenses are incurred by an employee, the employee’s supervisor and
Superintendent must give approval. For approved travel, employees will be reimbursed
for mileage and other travel expenditures according to the current rate schedule estab-
lished by the district. Employees must submit receipts, to the extent possible, to be reim-
bursed for expenses other than mileage.

Health, dental, and life insurance
Policy CRD

Group health insurance coverage is provided through TRS-ActiveCare, the statewide
public school health insurance program. The district’s contribution to employee insurance
premiums is determined annually by the board of trustees. Employees eligible for health
insurance coverage include the following:

   Employees who are active, contributing TRS members
   Employees who are not contributing TRS members and who are regularly scheduled
    to work at least 10 hours per week

TRS retirees and employees who are not contributing TRS members that are regularly
scheduled to work less than 10 hours per week are not eligible to participate in TRS-
ActiveCare.

The insurance plan year is from September 1 through August 31. Current employees can
make changes in their insurance coverage during open enrollment each spring. Detailed
descriptions of insurance coverage, employee cost, and eligibility requirements are pro-
vided to all employees in a separate booklet. Employees should contact Donna Lee for
more information.

Supplemental insurance benefits
Policy CRG

At their own expense, employees may enroll in certain supplemental insurance programs.
Employees should contact Donna Lee for more information.

Cafeteria plan benefits (Section 125)
Employees may be eligible to participate in the Cafeteria Plan (Section 125) and, under
IRS regulations, must either accept or reject this benefit. This plan enables eligible
employees to pay certain insurance premiums on a pretax basis (i.e., disability, accidental
death and dismemberment, cancer and dread disease, dental and additional term life
insurance). A third-party administrator handles employee claims made on these accounts.
New employees must accept or reject this benefit during their first month of employment.
All employees must accept or reject this benefit on an annual basis and during the speci-
fied time period.

Workers’ compensation insurance
Policy CRE

The district, in accordance with state law, provides workers’ compensation benefits to
employees who suffer a work-related illness or are injured on the job. The district has
workers’ compensation. Benefits help pay for medical treatment and make up for part of
the income lost while recovering. Specific benefits are prescribed by law depending on
the circumstances of each case.

All work-related accidents or injuries should be reported immediately to James Rice.
Employees who are unable to work because of a work-related injury will be notified of
their rights and responsibilities under the Texas Labor Code.

Unemployment compensation insurance
Policy CRF

Employees who have been laid off or terminated through no fault of their own may be
eligible for unemployment compensation benefits under the Texas Unemployment Com-
pensation Act. Employees are not eligible to collect unemployment benefits during regu-
larly scheduled breaks in the school year or the summer months if they have employment
contracts or reasonable assurance of returning to service. Employees with questions about
unemployment benefits should contact James Rice

Teacher retirement
Policy DEG

All personnel employed on a regular basis for at least one-half of the normal work sched-
ule are members of the Teacher Retirement System of Texas (TRS). Substitutes not
receiving TRS service retirement benefits who work at least 90 days a year are also
eligible for TRS membership and to purchase a year of creditable service. TRS provides
members with an annual statement of their account showing all deposits and the total
account balance for the year ending August 31, as well as an estimate of their retirement
benefits.

Employees who plan to retire under TRS should notify TRS as soon as possible.
Information on the application procedures for TRS benefits is available from TRS at
Teacher Retirement System of Texas, 1000 Red River Street, Austin, TX 78701-2698, or
call 800-223-8778 or 512-542-6400. TRS information is also available on the Web
(www.trs.state.tx.us).
Other benefit programs
Policy DEB


Leaves and absences
Policy DEC

The district offers employees paid and unpaid leaves of absence in times of personal
need. This handbook describes the basic types of leave available and restrictions on
leaves of absence. Employees who have personal needs that will require long leaves of
absence should call James Rice for counseling about leave options, continuation of
benefits, and communicating with the district.

Employees who take an unpaid leave of absence may continue their insurance benefits at
their own expense. Health care benefits for employees on leave authorized under the
Family and Medical Leave Act will be paid by the district as they were when they were
working. Otherwise, the district does not make benefit contributions for employees who
are not on active payroll status.

Employees must follow district and department or campus procedures to report or request
any leave of absence and complete the appropriate leave request form. Any employee
who is absent more than 3 days because of a personal or family illness must submit a
medical certification from a qualified health care provider confirming the specific dates
of the illness, the reason for the illness, and—in the case of personal illness—the
employee’s fitness to return to work.

Personal and local sick leave is earned on a one day per semester basis. Leave is available
for the employee’s use as it is earned. If an employee leaves the district before the end of
the work year, the cost of any unearned leave days taken shall be deducted from the
employee’s final paycheck.

Personal leave
State law entitles all employees to five days of paid personal leave per year. Personal
leave is earned at a rate of one day per 18 contract days. A day of earned personal leave is
equivalent to an assigned workday. There is no limit on the accumulation of state
personal leave, and it can be transferred to other Texas school districts and is generally
transferable to education service centers. There are two types of personal leave:
nondiscretionary and discretionary.

Nondiscretionary. Leave that is taken for personal or family illness, emergency, a death
in the family, or active military service is considered nondiscretionary leave. This type of
leave allows very little or no advance planning and will be granted to employees in the
same manner as sick leave.
Discretionary. Leave that is taken at an employee’s discretion and that can be scheduled
in advance is considered discretionary leave. An employee wishing to take discretionary
personal leave must submit a notice of the request 2 days in advance of the anticipated
absence to his or her principal or supervisor. Discretionary personal leave will be granted
on a first-come, first-served basis. The effect of the employee’s absence on the
educational program or department operations, as well as the availability of substitutes,
will be considered by the principal or supervisor.

Sick leave
Previously accumulated state sick leave is available for use and may be transferred to
other school districts in Texas. Sick leave can be used only in 5 day increments except
when coordinated with family and medical leave taken on an intermittent or reduced-
schedule basis or when coordinated with workers’ compensation benefits.

Sick leave may be used for the following reasons only:

   Employee illness
   Illness in the employee’s immediate family
   Family emergency (i.e., natural disasters or life-threatening situations)
   Death in the immediate family
   Active military service

Local leave

Temporary disability
Certified employees. Any full-time employee whose position requires certification from
the State Board for Educator Certification (SBEC) is eligible for temporary disability
leave. The purpose of temporary disability leave is to provide job protection to full-time
educators who cannot work for an extended period of time because of a mental or physi-
cal disability of a temporary nature. A full-time educator may request to be placed on
temporary disability leave or be placed on leave. Pregnancy and conditions related to
pregnancy are treated the same as any other temporary disability.

Employees must request approval for temporary disability leave. The leave request must
be accompanied by a physician’s statement confirming the employee’s inability to work
and estimating a probable date of return. If disability leave is approved, the length of
leave is no longer than 180 days. If disability leave is not approved, the employee must
return to work or be subject to termination procedures.

If an employee is placed on temporary disability leave involuntarily, he or she has the
right to request a hearing before the board of trustees. The employee may protest the
action and present additional evidence of fitness to work.
When an employee is ready to return to work, the superintendent should be notified at
least 30 days in advance. The return-to-work notice must be accompanied by a physi-
cian’s statement confirming that the employee is able to do the job. Professional employ-
ees returning from leave will be reinstated to the school to which they were previously
assigned as soon as an appropriate position is available. If a position is not available
before the end of the school year, professional employees will be reinstated at the begin-
ning of the following school year.

Family and medical leave
Employees who have been employed by the district for at least 12 months and have
worked at least 1,250 hours in the 12 months immediately preceding the need for leave
are eligible for family and medical leave. Eligible employees can take up to 12 weeks of
unpaid leave each year between September 1 and August 31 for the following reasons:

   The birth, adoption, or foster placement of a child
   To care for a spouse, parent, or child with a serious health condition
   An employee’s serious health condition

A husband and wife who are both employed by the district are subject to limits in the
amount of leave that they can take to care for a parent with a serious health condition or
for the birth, adoption, or foster placement of a child.

Eligible employees are entitled to continue their health care benefits under the same
terms and conditions as when they were on the job and are entitled to return to their pre-
vious job or an equivalent job at the end of their leave. Under some circumstances, teach-
ers who are able to return to work at or near the conclusion of a semester may be required
to continue their leave until the end of the semester.

Family and medical leave runs concurrently with accrued sick and personal leave, tempo-
rary disability leave, and absences due to a work-related illness or injury. The district will
designate the leave as family and medical leave, if applicable, and notify the employee
that accumulated leave will run concurrently.

In some circumstances, employees may take family and medical leave in blocks of time
or by reducing their normal weekly or daily work schedule. Intermittent leave may be
taken under the following circumstances:

   An employee is needed to care for a seriously ill spouse, child, or parent
   An employee requires medical treatment for a serious illness
   An employee is seriously ill and unable to work
   An employee becomes a parent or has a foster child placed in his or her home

When the need for family and medical leave is foreseeable, employees who want to use it
must provide 30-day advance notice of their need. When the need for leave is not foresee-
able, employees must contact James Rice as soon as possible. Employees may be
required to provide the following:

   Medical certification from a qualified health care provider supporting the need for
    leave due to a serious health condition affecting the employee or an immediate
    family member
   Second or third medical opinions and periodic recertification of the need for leave
   Periodic reports during the leave regarding the employee’s status and intent to return
    to work
   Medical certification from a qualified health care provider at the conclusion of leave
    of an employee’s ability to return to work

Employees requiring family and medical leave should contact the central administration
office for details on eligibility, requirements, and limitations.

Workers’ compensation benefits
An employee absent from duty because of a job-related illness or injury may be eligible
for workers’ compensation weekly income benefits if the absence exceeds seven calendar
days.


An employee receiving workers’ compensation wage benefits for a job-related illness or
injury may choose to use accumulated sick leave or any other paid leave benefits. An
employee choosing to use paid leave will not receive workers’ compensation weekly
income benefits until all paid leave is exhausted or to the extent that paid leave does not
equal the pre-illness or -injury wage. If the use of paid leave is not elected, then the
employee will only receive workers’ compensation wage benefits for any absence result-
ing from a work-related illness or injury, which may not equal his or her pre-illness or
-injury wage.

Assault leave
Assault leave provides extended job income and benefits protection to an employee who
is injured as the result of a physical assault suffered during the performance of his or her
job. An injury is treated as an assault if the person causing the injury could be prosecuted
for assault or could not be prosecuted only because that person’s age or mental capacity
renders the person nonresponsible for purposes of criminal liability.

An employee who is physically assaulted at work may take all the leave time medically
necessary (up to two years) to recover from the physical injuries he or she sustained. At
the request of an employee, the district will immediately assign the employee to assault
leave. Days of leave granted under the assault leave provision will not be deducted from
accrued personal leave and must be coordinated with workers’ compensation benefits.
Upon investigation the district may change the assault leave status and charge leave used
against the employee’s accrued paid leave. The employee’s pay will be deducted if
accrued paid leave is not available.


Jury duty
Employees will receive leave with pay and without loss of accumulated leave for jury
duty. Employees must present documentation of the service.

Other court appearances
Employees will be granted paid leave to comply with a valid subpoena to appear in a
civil, criminal, legislative, or administrative proceeding. Absences for court appearances
related to an employee’s personal business must be taken as personal leave or leave
without pay (if no personal leave is available). Employees may be required to submit
documentation of their need for leave for court appearances.

Military leave
Paid leave for military service. Any employee who is a member of the Texas National
Guard, Texas State Guard, or reserve component of the armed forces will be granted a
paid leave of absence without loss of any accumulated leave for authorized training or
duty orders. Paid military leave will not exceed 15 days per year. In addition, an
employee is entitled to use available state and local personal or sick leave during a time
of active military service.

Reemployment after military leave. Employees who leave the district to enter into the
United States uniformed services or ordered to active state military duty (Texas National
Guard or Texas State Guard) may return to employment if they are honorably discharged.
Employees who wish to return to the district will be reemployed in the position they
would have held if employment had not been interrupted or reassigned to an equivalent or
similar position provided they are still qualified to perform the required duties. To be eli-
gible for reemployment, employees must provide notice of their obligation or intent to
perform military service, provide evidence of honorable discharge or release, and submit
an application for reemployment to the superintendent.

Continuation of health insurance. Employees who perform service in the uniformed
services may elect to continue their health plan coverage at their own cost for a period not
to exceed 24 months. Employees should contact the business manager for details on
eligibility, requirements, and limitations.
Employee recognition and appreciation
Policy DJ

Continuous efforts are made throughout the year to recognize employees who make an
extra effort to contribute to the success of the district. Employees are recognized at board
meetings, in the district newsletter, and through special events and activities.
  Complaints and grievances
  Policy DGBA

                     In an effort to hear and resolve employee concerns or complaints
                     in a timely manner and at the lowest administrative level possible,
                     the board has adopted an orderly process that all employees must
                     follow. Employees are encouraged to discuss their concerns or
                     complaints with their supervisors or an appropriate administrator at
                     any time.

                     The formal process provides all employees with an opportunity to
                     be heard up to the highest level of management if they are
                     dissatisfied with an administrative response. Once all
                     administrative procedures are exhausted, employees can bring
                     concerns or complaints to the board of trustees. For ease of
                     reference, the district’s policy concerning the process of bringing
                     concerns and complaints is reprinted as follows:

GUIDING PRINCIPLES   The Board encourages employees to discuss their concerns and
  INFORMAL
                     complaints through informal conferences with their supervisor,
  PROCESS            principal, or other appropriate administrator. Concerns should be
                     expressed as soon as possible to allow early resolution at the
                      lowest possible administrative level.
  DIRECT              Employees shall not be prohibited from communicating with
  COMMUNICATION       Board members regarding District operations except when
  WITH BOARD          communication between an employee and a Board member
  MEMBERS             would be inappropriate because of a pending hearing or appeal
                     related to the employee.
  FORMAL PROCESS     If an informal conference regarding a complaint fails to reach the
                     outcome requested by the employee, he or she may initiate the
                     formal process described below by timely filing a written complaint
                     form.
                     Even after initiating the formal complaint process, employees are
                     encouraged to seek informal resolution of their concerns. An
                     employee whose concerns are resolved may withdraw a formal
                     complaint at any time.
                     The process described in this policy shall not be construed to
                     create new or additional rights beyond those granted by law or
                     Board policy, nor to require a full evidentiary hearing or “mini-trial”
                     at any level.
FREEDOM FROM
RETALIATION          Neither the Board nor any District employee shall unlawfully
                     retaliate against an employee for bringing a concern or complaint.
                     [See DG]
NOTICE TO
EMPLOYEES
  The principal of each campus and other supervisory personnel shall inform employees of
                         this policy.
SPECIFIC                For more information on how to proceed with complaints
COMPLAINTS
                        regarding:
                       1.     Alleged discrimination, including violations of Title IX or
                       Section 504, see DAA.
                       2.     Instructional materials, see EFA.
                       3.      A commissioned peace officer who is an employee of the
                                           District, see CKE.
  OTHER REVIEW         Complaints alleging certain forms of harassment, including
  PROCESSES            harassment by a supervisor, shall be processed in accordance
                       with DIA.
                       Complaints arising from any of the following must be addressed
                       through the local and statutory processes indicated below:
                       1.    The proposed nonrenewal of a term contract issued under
                       Chapter 21 of the Texas Education Code, in accordance with
                       DFBB.
                       2.      The proposed termination or suspension without pay of an
                       employee on a probationary, term, or continuing contract issued
                       under Chapter 21 of the Texas Education Code during the contract
                       term, in accordance with DFAA, DFBA, or DFCA, respectively.
                       This policy shall apply to all other employee complaints.
  DEFINITIONS          For purposes of this policy, terms are defined as follows:

 COMPLAINT /           The terms “complaint” and “grievance” shall have the same
 GRIEVANCE             meaning. A complaint under this policy may include:
                       1.      Grievances concerning an employee’s wages, hours, or
                       conditions of work;
                       2.      Specific allegations of unlawful discrimination in
                       employment based on the employee’s sex, race, religion, national
                       origin, age, or disability;
                       3.    Specific allegations of unlawful discrimination or retaliation
                       based on the employee’s exercise of legally protected rights; or
                       4.       Specific allegations of adverse personnel action based on
                       the employee’s good faith report to an appropriate law
                       enforcement authority of a violation of a law by the District or a
                       District employee, i.e., “whistleblower complaints.” [See DG]
                       5.       Complaints arising from the dismissal or termination of an
                       at-will employee. [See DCD]
                   6.     Complaints arising from the termination at end of year of
                   the probationary contract of a professional employee. [See DFAB]

  FILING           Complaint forms and appeal notices may be filed by hand-
                   delivery, fax, or U.S. Mail. Hand-delivered filings shall be timely
                   filed if received by the appropriate administrator or designee by
                   the close of business on the deadline. Fax filings shall be timely
                   filed if they are received on or before the deadline, as indicated by
                   the date/time shown on the fax copy. Mail filings shall be timely
                   filed if they are postmarked by U.S. Mail on the deadline and
                   received by the appropriate administrator or designated
                   representative no more than three days after the deadline.

  RESPONSE         At Levels One and Two, “response” shall mean a written
                   communication to the employee from the appropriate
                   administrator. Responses may be hand-delivered or sent by U.S.
                   Mail to the employee’s mailing address of record. Mailed
                   responses shall be timely if they are postmarked by U.S. Mail on
                   the deadline and received by the employee or designated
                   representative no more than three days after the response
                   deadline.
  DAYS             “Days” shall mean District business days. In calculating time lines
                   under this policy, the day a document is filed is “day zero,” and all
                   deadlines shall be determined by counting the following day as
                   “day one.”

REPRESENTATIVE     “Representative” means any person who or an organization that
                   does not claim the right to strike and is designated by the
                   employee to represent him or her in the complaint process.
                   The employee may designate a representative through written
DESIGNATION OF
REPRESENTATIVE
                   notice to the District at any level of this process. If the employee
                   designates a representative with fewer than three days’ notice to
                   the District before a scheduled conference or hearing, the District
                   may reschedule the conference or hearing to a later date, if
                   desired, in order to include the District’s counsel.

WHISTLEBLOWER      Whistleblower complaints shall be filed within the time specified by
COMPLAINTS         law. Such complaints shall first be filed in accordance with LEVEL
                   TWO, below. Time lines for the employee and the District set out
                   in this policy may be shortened to allow the Board to make a final
                   decision within 60 days of the initiation of the complaint. [See DG]

 GENERAL           Complaints arising out of an event or a series of related events
 PROVISIONS        shall be addressed in one complaint. Employees shall not bring
                   separate or serial complaints arising from any event or series of
                   events that have been or could have been addressed in a
                   previous complaint.




UNTIMELY FILINGS
                       When two or more complaints are sufficiently similar in nature and
                       remedy sought to permit their resolution through one proceeding,
                       the District may consolidate the complaints.
All time limits shall be strictly followed unless modified by mutual written consent.
                       If a complaint form or appeal notice is not timely filed, the
                       complaint may be dismissed, on written notice to the employee, at
                       any point during the complaint process. The employee may
                       appeal the dismissal by seeking review in writing within ten days,
                       starting at the level at which the complaint was dismissed. Such
                       appeal shall be limited to the issue of timeliness.

COSTS INCURRED         Each party shall pay its own costs incurred in the course of the
                       complaint.
                       Complaints under this policy shall be submitted in writing on a
 COMPLAINT FORM
                       form provided by the District.
                       Copies of any documents that support the complaint should be
                       attached to the complaint form. If the employee does not have
                       copies of these documents, they may be presented at the Level
                       One conference. After the Level One conference, no new
                       documents may be submitted unless the employee did not know
                       the documents existed before the Level One conference.
                       A complaint form that is incomplete in any material aspect may be
                       dismissed, but may be refiled with all the requested information if
                       the refiling is within the designated time for filing a complaint.
 COMPLAINTS            Complaints alleging a supervisor’s violation of law may be made
 AGAINST               to the Superintendent beginning at Level Two. A complaint
 SUPERVISORS           alleging a violation of law by the Superintendent may be made
                       directly to the Board beginning at Level Three.
 LEVEL ONE
                       Complaint forms must be filed:
                       1.      Within 15 days of the date the employee first knew, or with
                       reasonable diligence should have known, of the decision or action
                       giving rise to the complaint or grievance; and
                       2.    With the lowest level administrator who has the authority to
                       remedy the alleged problem.
                       In most circumstances, employees on a school campus shall file
                       Level One complaints with the campus principal; other District
                       employees shall file Level One complaints with their immediate
                       supervisor.
                       If the only administrator who has authority to remedy the alleged
                       problem is the Superintendent or designee, the complaint may
                       begin at Level Two following the procedure, including deadlines,
                       for filing the complaint form at Level One.
              If the complaint is not filed with the appropriate administrator, the
              receiving administrator must note the date and time the complaint
              form was received and immediately forward the complaint form to
              the appropriate administrator.
              The appropriate administrator shall hold a conference with the
              employee within ten days after receipt of the written complaint.
              The administrator shall have ten days following the conference to
              provide the employee a written response.
LEVEL TWO     If the employee did not receive the relief requested at Level One
              or if the time for a response has expired, the employee may
              request a conference with the Superintendent or designee to
              appeal the Level One decision.
              The appeal notice must be filed in writing, on a form provided by
              the District, within ten days after receipt of a response or, if no
              response was received, within ten days of the response deadline
              at Level One.
              The Superintendent or designee shall hold a conference within ten
              days after the appeal notice is filed. At the conference, the
              Superintendent or designee shall consider only the issues and
              documents presented at Level One and identified in the Level Two
              appeal notice. The Superintendent or designee shall have ten
              days following the conference to provide the employee a written
              response.
LEVEL THREE   If the employee did not receive the relief requested at Level Two
              or if the time for a response has expired, the employee may
              appeal the decision to the Board.
              The appeal notice must be filed in writing, on a form provided by
              the District, within ten days after receipt of a response or, if no
              response was received, within ten days of the response deadline
              at Level Two.
              The Superintendent or designee shall inform the employee of the
              date, time, and place of the Board meeting at which the complaint
              will be on the agenda for presentation to the Board.
              The Superintendent or designee shall provide the Board with
              copies of the complaint form, all responses, all appeal notices,
              and all written documentation previously submitted by the
              employee or the administration. The Board shall consider only
              those issues and documents presented at the preceding levels
              and identified in the appeal notice.
              The District shall determine whether the complaint will be
              presented in open or closed meeting in accordance with the Texas
              Open Meetings Act and other applicable law. [See BE]
                       The presiding officer may set reasonable time limits and
                       guidelines for the presentation. The Board shall hear the
                       complaint and may request that the administration provide an
                       explanation for the decisions at the preceding levels.
                       In addition to any other record of the Board meeting required by
                       law, the Board shall prepare a separate record of the Level Three
                       presentation. The Level Three presentation, including the
                       presentation by the employee or the employee’s representative,
                       any presentation from the administration, and questions from the
                       Board with responses, shall be recorded by audio recording,
                       video/audio recording, or court reporter.
                       The Board shall then consider the complaint. It may give notice of
                       its decision orally or in writing at any time up to and including the
                       next regularly scheduled Board meeting. If for any reason the
                       Board fails to reach a decision regarding the complaint by the end
                       of the next regularly scheduled meeting, the lack of a response by
                       the Board upholds the administrative decision at Level Two.



Employee conduct and welfare
Standards of conduct
Policy DH

All employees are expected to work together in a cooperative spirit to serve the best
interests of the district and to be courteous to students, one another, and the public.
Employees are expected to observe the following standards of conduct:

   Recognize and respect the rights of students, parents, other employees, and members
    of the community.
   Maintain confidentiality in all matters relating to students and co-workers.
   Report to work according to the assigned schedule.
   Notify their immediate supervisor in advance or as early as possible in the event that
    they must be absent or late. Unauthorized absences, chronic absenteeism, tardiness,
    and failure to follow procedures for reporting an absence may be cause for
    disciplinary action.
   Know and comply with department and district policies and procedures.
   Express concerns, complaints, or criticism through appropriate channels.
   Observe all safety rules and regulations and report injuries or unsafe conditions to a
    supervisor immediately.
   Use district time, funds, and property for authorized district business and activities
    only.

All district employees should perform their duties in accordance with state and federal
law, district policies and procedures, and ethical standards. Violation of policies, regula-
tions, or guidelines may result in disciplinary action, including termination. Alleged inci-
dents of certain misconduct by educators, including having a criminal record, must be
reported to SBEC not later than the seventh day the superintendent first learns of the inci-
dent.

The Code of Ethics and Standard Practices for Texas Educators, adopted by the State
Board for Educator Certification, which all district employees must adhere to, is reprinted
below:

             Code of Ethics and Standard Practices for Texas Educators

      Statement of Purpose

      The Texas educator shall comply with standard practices and ethical
      conduct toward students, professional colleagues, school officials, parents,
      and members of the community and shall safeguard academic freedom. The
      Texas educator, in maintaining the dignity of the profession, shall respect
      and obey the law, demonstrate personal integrity, and exemplify honesty.
      The Texas educator, in exemplifying ethical relations with colleagues, shall
      extend just and equitable treatment to all members of the profession. The
      Texas educator, in accepting a position of public trust, shall measure
      success by the progress of each student toward realization of his or her
      potential as an effective citizen. The Texas educator, in fulfilling
      responsibilities in the community, shall cooperate with parents and others to
      improve the public schools of the community.

      Professional Standards

      1. Professional Ethical Conduct, Practices, and Performance

         Standard 1.1 The educator shall not knowingly engage in deceptive
         practices regarding official policies of the school district or educational
         institution.
         Standard 1.2 The educator shall not knowingly misappropriate, divert, or
         use monies, personnel, property, or equipment committed to his or her
         charge for personal gain or advantage.
         Standard 1.3 The educator shall not submit fraudulent requests for
         reimbursement, expenses, or pay.
         Standard 1.4 The educator shall not use institutional or professional
         privileges for personal or partisan advantage.
         Standard 1.5 The educator shall neither accept nor offer gratuities, gifts,
         or favors that impair professional judgment or to obtain special advantage.
         This standard shall not restrict the acceptance of gifts or tokens offered
         and accepted openly from students, parents, or other persons or
         organizations in recognition or appreciation of service.
  Standard 1.6 The educator shall not falsify records, or direct or coerce
  others to do so.
  Standard 1.7 The educator shall comply with state regulations, written
  local school board policies, and other applicable state and federal laws.
  Standard 1.8 The educator shall apply for, accept, offer, or assign a
  position or a responsibility on the basis of professional qualifications.

2. Ethical Conduct toward Professional Colleagues

  Standard 2.1 The educator shall not reveal confidential health or
  personnel information concerning colleagues unless disclosure serves
  lawful professional purposes or is required by law.
  Standard 2.2 The educator shall not harm others by knowingly making
  false statements about a colleague or the school system.
  Standard 2.3 The educator shall adhere to written local school board
  policies and state and federal laws regarding the hiring, evaluation, and
  dismissal of personnel.
  Standard 2.4 The educator shall not interfere with a colleague's exercise
  of political, professional, or citizenship rights and responsibilities.
  Standard 2.5 The educator shall not discriminate against or coerce a
  colleague on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex,
  disability, or family status.
  Standard 2.6 The educator shall not use coercive means or promise of
  special treatment in order to influence professional decisions or
  colleagues.
  Standard 2.7 The educator shall not retaliate against any individual who
  has filed a complaint with the SBEC under this chapter.

3. Ethical Conduct toward Students

  Standard 3.1 The educator shall not reveal confidential information
  concerning students unless disclosure serves lawful professional
  purposes or is required by law.
  Standard 3.2 The educator shall not knowingly treat a student in a
  manner that adversely affects the student's learning, physical health,
  mental health, or safety.
  Standard 3.3 The educator shall not deliberately or knowingly
  misrepresent facts regarding a student.
  Standard 3.4 The educator shall not exclude a student from participation
  in a program, deny benefits to a student, or grant an advantage to a
  student on the basis of race, color, sex, disability, national origin, religion,
  or family status.
  Standard 3.5 The educator shall not engage in physical mistreatment of
  a student.
  Standard 3.6 The educator shall not solicit or engage in sexual conduct
  or a romantic relationship with a student.
             Standard 3.7 The educator shall not furnish alcohol or
             illegal/unauthorized drugs to any student or knowingly allow any student to
             consume alcohol or illegal/unauthorized drugs in the presence of the
             educator.

    Harassment
    Policies DH, DIA

    Employees shall not engage in prohibited harassment, including sexual harassment, of
    other employees or students. While acting in the course of their employment, employees
    shall not engage in prohibited harassment of other persons, including board members,
    vendors, contractors, volunteers, or parents. A substantiated charge of harassment will
    result in disciplinary action.

    Employees who believe they have been harassed are encouraged to promptly report such
    incidents to the campus principal, supervisor, or appropriate district official. If the cam-
    pus principal or supervisor is the subject of a complaint, the employee should report the
    complaint directly to the superintendent.

    The district’s policy that includes definitions and procedures for reporting and investigat-
    ing harassment is reprinted below:

                Note:      This policy addresses harassment of District employees. For
                           harassment of students, see FFH. For reporting requirements
                           related to child abuse and neglect, see FFG.

                           The District prohibits sexual harassment and harassment based
                           on a person’s race, color, gender, national origin, disability,
                           religion, or age.
                           Employees shall not tolerate harassment of others and shall make
                           reports as required at reporting procedures, below.
                          Sexual harassment of an employee is defined as unwelcome
SEXUAL
HARASSMENT
                          sexual advances; requests for sexual favors; sexually motivated
                          physical, verbal, or nonverbal conduct; or other conduct or
                           communication of a sexual nature when:
                           1.      Submission to the conduct is either explicitly or implicitly a
                           condition of an employee’s employment, or when submission to or
                           rejection of the conduct is the basis for an employment action
                           affecting the employee; or
                           2.     The conduct is so severe, persistent, or pervasive that it
                           has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the
                           employee’s work performance or creates an intimidating,
                           threatening, hostile, or offensive work environment.

EXAMPLES
                         Examples of sexual harassment may include, but are not limited
                         to, sexual advances; touching intimate body parts; coercing or
                         forcing a sexual act on another; jokes or conversations of a sexual
                         nature; and other sexually motivated conduct, communication, or
                         contact.
OTHER PROHIBITED         Harassment of a District employee on the basis of the employee’s
HARASSMENT               race, color, gender, national origin, disability, religion, or age
                         includes physical, verbal, or nonverbal conduct related to these
                         characteristics when the conduct is so severe, persistent, or
                         pervasive that the conduct:
                    1.   Has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the
                         employee’s work performance;
                    2.   Creates an intimidating, threatening, hostile, or offensive work
                         environment; or
                    3.   Otherwise adversely affects the employee’s employment
                         opportunities.

 EXAMPLES
                         Examples of prohibited harassment may include, but are not
                         limited to, offensive or derogatory language directed at another
                         person’s religious beliefs or practices, accent, skin color, or need
                         for workplace accommodation; threatening or intimidating conduct;
                         offensive jokes, name calling, slurs, or rumors; physical
                         aggression or assault; display of graffiti or printed material
                         promoting racial, ethnic, or other negative stereotypes; or other
                         types of aggressive conduct such as theft or damage to property.

 REPORTING               An employee who believes that he or she has experienced
 PROCEDURES              prohibited harassment should immediately report the alleged acts
                         to an appropriate person designated below.
                         Any District employee with supervisory authority who receives
                         notice that another employee has or may have experienced
                         prohibited harassment is required to immediately report the
                         alleged acts and take whatever other steps are required by this
                         policy.
                         Any other person who knows or believes that a District employee
                         has experienced harassment should immediately report the
                         alleged acts to the appropriate person designated by this policy.

 TIMELY REPORTING
                         Reports of harassment shall be made as soon as possible after
                         the alleged acts. A failure to promptly report alleged harassment
                         may impair the District’s ability to investigate and address the
                         harassment.
                         A District employee may report harassment to his or her
                         supervisor or campus principal. A person shall not be required to
                         report harassment to the alleged harasser; nothing in this policy
                         prevents a person from reporting harassment directly to one of the
                         District officials below:
                    1.     For sexual harassment, the Title IX coordinator. [See
DISTRICT
                           DAA(LOCAL)]
OFFICIALS
                    2.     For all other prohibited harassment, the Superintendent.
                         A report against the Title IX coordinator may be made directly to
                         the Superintendent; a report against the Superintendent may be
                          made directly to the Board.
 NOTIFICATION OF         Upon receipt of a report of harassment, a supervisor or principal
 REPORT                  shall immediately notify the appropriate District official listed
                         above.
 CONFIDENTIALITY          To the greatest extent possible, the District shall respect the
                          privacy of the complainant, persons against whom a report is
                         filed, and witnesses. Limited disclosures may be necessary in
                         order to conduct a thorough investigation and comply with
                         applicable law.

 INVESTIGATION OF        The District may request, but shall not insist upon, a written
 THE REPORT              report. If a report is made orally, the District official shall reduce
                         the report to written form.
                         Upon receipt or notification of a report, the District official shall
                         determine whether the allegations, if proven, would constitute
                         sexual harassment or other prohibited harassment as defined by
                         District policy. If so, the District official shall immediately authorize
                         or undertake an investigation.
                         If appropriate, the District shall promptly take interim action to
                         prevent harassment during the course of an investigation.
                         The investigation may be conducted by the District official or a
                         designee, such as the campus principal, or by a third party
                         designated by the District, such as an attorney. When
                         appropriate, the campus principal or supervisor shall be involved
                         in or informed of the investigation.
                         The investigation may consist of personal interviews with the
                         person making the report, the person against whom the report is
                         filed, and others with knowledge of the circumstances surrounding
                         the allegations. The investigation may also include analysis of
                         other information or documents related to the allegations.
                      The District’s obligation to conduct an investigation is not satisfied
                      by the fact that a criminal or regulatory investigation regarding the
                     same or similar allegations is pending.
CONCLUDING THE       Absent extenuating circumstances, the investigation should be
INVESTIGATION        completed within ten business days from the date of the report;
                     however, the investigator shall take additional time if necessary to
                          complete a thorough investigation.
                          The investigator shall prepare a written report of the investigation.
                          The report shall be filed with the District official overseeing the
                          investigation.
DISTRICT ACTION          If the results of an investigation indicate that prohibited harassment
                         occurred, the District shall promptly respond by taking appropriate
                           disciplinary or corrective action reasonably calculated to address
                           the harassment.
                          The District may take disciplinary action based on the results of an
                          investigation, even if the District concludes that the conduct did
                          not rise to the level of harassment prohibited by law or District
                           policy.
 APPEAL                    A complainant who is dissatisfied with the outcome of the
                           investigation may appeal through DGBA (LOCAL), beginning at
                          the appropriate level.
                          The complainant shall be informed of his or her right to file a
                          complaint with the Texas Workforce Commission Civil Rights
                          Division, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, or the
                          United States Department of Education Office for Civil Rights.
 RETALIATION              Retaliation against an employee alleged to have experienced
 PROHIBITED               harassment, a witness, or another person who makes a report or
                          participates in an investigation is strictly prohibited. A person who
                          makes a good faith report of prohibited harassment shall not suffer
                          retaliation for making the report. A person who intentionally makes
                          a false claim, offers false statements, or refuses to cooperate with
                          a District investigation regarding prohibited harassment is subject
                          to appropriate discipline.

RECORDS RETENTION        Retention of records shall be in accordance with DAA (LOCAL).
ACCESS TO POLICY         This policy shall be distributed annually to District employees.
                         Copies of the policy shall be readily available at each campus and
                          the District administrative offices.

    Harassment of students
    Policies DH, FFG, FFH

    Sexual and other harassment of students by employees are forms of discrimination and are
    prohibited by law. Romantic or inappropriate social relationships between students and
    district employees are prohibited. Employees who suspect a student may have experienced
    prohibited harassment are obligated to report their concerns to the campus principal or
    other appropriate district official. All allegations of prohibited harassment or abuse of a
    student will be reported to the student’s parents and promptly investigated. An employee
    who knows of or suspects child abuse must also report his or her knowledge or suspicion
    to the appropriate authorities, as required by law.
    The district’s policy that includes definitions and procedures for reporting and investigat-
    ing harassment of students is reprinted below:

                           The District may develop and implement a sexual harassment
                           policy to be included in the District improvement plan. The District
                           shall adopt and implement a dating violence policy to be included
                           in the District improvement plan. Education Code 37.083,
                           37.0831 [See BQ]
                           Sexual abuse of a student by an employee, when there is a
                           connection between the physical sexual activity and the
                           employee’s duties and obligations as a District employee violates
                           a student’s constitutional right to bodily integrity. Sexual abuse
                           may include fondling, sexual assault, or sexual intercourse. U.S.
                           Const. Amend. 14; Doe v. Taylor ISD, 15 F.3d 443 (5th Cir. 1994)
                           Sexual harassment of students may constitute discrimination on
                           the basis of sex in violation of Title IX. 20 U.S.C. 1681; 34 CFR
                           106.11; Franklin v. Gwinnett County Schools, 503 U.S. 60 (1992)
                           [See FB regarding Title IX]
    DEFINITION OF          Sexual harassment of students is conduct that is so severe,
    SEXUAL                 pervasive, and objectively offensive that it can be said to deprive
    HARASSMENT             the victim of access to the educational opportunities or benefits
                           provided by the school. Sexual harassment does not include
                           simple acts of teasing and name-calling among school children,
                           however, even when the comments target differences in gender.
                           Davis v. Monroe County Bd. of Educ., 526 U.S. 629 (1999)
 EMPLOYEE- STUDENT       A District official who has authority to address alleged harassment
 SEXUAL                  by employees on the District’s behalf shall take corrective
 HARASSMENT              measures to address the harassment or abuse. Gebser v. Lago
                         Vista ISD, 118 S.Ct. 1989 524 U.S. 274 (1998); Doe v. Taylor ISD,
                        15 F.3d 443 (5th Cir. 1994)
STUDENT-STUDENT         The District must reasonably respond to known student-on-student
SEXUAL                  harassment where the harasser is under the District’s disciplinary
HARASSMENT              authority. Davis v. Monroe County Bd. of Educ., 526 U.S. 629 (1999)


    Drug-abuse prevention
    Policies DH, DI

    Northside ISD is committed to maintaining an alcohol- and drug-free environment and
    will not tolerate the use of alcohol and illegal drugs in the workplace and at school-
    related or school-sanctioned activities on or off school property.
    . Employees who use or are under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs as defined by
    the Texas Controlled Substances Act during working hours may be dismissed. The
    district’s policy regarding employee drug use follows:
                           All District employees shall perform their duties in accordance with
                           state and federal law, District policy, and ethical standards. [See
                           DH (EXHIBIT)]
                            All District employees shall recognize and respect the rights of
                            students, parents, other employees, and members of the
                            community and shall work cooperatively with others to serve the
                            best interests of the District.
                            Employees wishing to express concern, complaints, or criticism
                            shall do so through appropriate channels. [See DGBA]
    VIOLATIONS OF            Employees shall comply with the standards of conduct set out in
    STANDARDS OF
                             this policy and with any other policies, regulations, and guidelines
    CONDUCT
                             that impose duties, requirements, or standards attendant to their
                             status as District employees. Violation of any policies, regulations,
                             or guidelines may result in disciplinary action, including
                           termination of employment. [See DCD and DF series]
  SAFETY                   All employees shall adhere to District safety rules and regulations
  REQUIREMENTS             and shall report unsafe conditions or practices to the appropriate
                           supervisor.
  HARASSMENT OR            Employees shall not engage in prohibited harassment, including
  ABUSE                    sexual harassment, of:
                      1.    Other employees. [See DIA]
                      2.    Students. [See FFH; see FFG regarding child abuse and neglect]
                            While acting in the course of their employment, employees shall
                            not engage in prohibited harassment, including sexual
                            harassment, of other persons, including Board members, vendors,
                            contractors, volunteers, or parents.

 RELATIONSHIPS WITH
                            Employees shall not form romantic or other inappropriate social
 STUDENTS                   relationships with students. Any sexual relationship between a
                            student and a District employee is always prohibited, even if
                            consensual. [See FFH]
  TOBACCO USE               Employees shall not use tobacco products on District premises, in
                            District vehicles, or at school or school-related activities. [See
                            also GKA]

ALCOHOL AND DRUGS           Employees shall not manufacture, distribute, dispense, possess,
                            use, or be under the influence of any of the following substances
                            during working hours while at school or at school-related activities
                            during or outside of usual working hours:
                      1.    Any controlled substance or dangerous drug as defined by law,
                            including but not limited to marijuana, any narcotic drug,
                            hallucinogen, stimulant, depressant, amphetamine, or barbiturate.
                      2.    Alcohol or any alcoholic beverage.
                   3.       Any abusable glue, aerosol paint, or any other chemical substance
                            for inhalation.
                   4.       Any other intoxicant, or mood-changing, mind-altering, or
                            behavior-altering drugs.
                            An employee need not be legally intoxicated to be considered
                            “under the influence” of a controlled substance.

   EXCEPTIONS                An employee who manufactures, possesses, or dispenses a
                             substance listed above as part of the employee’s job
                            responsibilities, or who uses a drug authorized by a licensed
                            physician prescribed for the employee’s personal use shall not be
                            considered to have violated this policy.

   NOTICE                   Each employee shall be given a copy of the District’s notice
                            regarding drug-free schools. [See DI (EXHIBIT)]
                            A copy of this policy, a purpose of which is to eliminate drug abuse
                            from the workplace, shall be provided to each employee at the
                            beginning of each year or upon employment.

ARRESTS,                An employee shall notify his or her principal or immediate
INDICTMENTS,            supervisor within three calendar days of any arrest, indictment,
CONVICTIONS, AND        conviction, no contest or guilty plea, or other adjudication of the
OTHER                   employee for any felony, any offense involving moral turpitude, and
ADJUDICATIONS           any of the other offenses as indicated below:
                   1.       Crimes involving school property or funds;
                   2.       Crimes involving attempt by fraudulent or unauthorized means to
                            obtain or alter any certificate or permit that would entitle any
                            person to hold or obtain a position as an educator;
                   3.       Crimes that occur wholly or in part on school property or at a
                            school-sponsored activity; or
                   4.       Crimes involving moral turpitude, which include:
                               Dishonesty; fraud; deceit; theft; misrepresentation;
                                Deliberate violence;
                                Base, vile, or depraved acts that are intended to arouse or
                               gratify the sexual desire of the actor;
                                Felony possession, transfer, sale, distribution, or conspiracy
                               to possess, transfer, sell, or distribute any controlled
                               substance defined in Chapter 481 of the Health and Safety
                               Code;
                                Acts constituting public intoxication, operating a motor
                               vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, or disorderly
                               conduct, if any two or more acts are committed within any 12-
                               month period; or
                               Acts constituting abuse under the Texas Family Code.

DRESS AND             The dress and grooming of District employees shall be clean, neat, in
GROOMING              a manner appropriate for their assignments, and in accordance with
                      any additional standards established by their supervisors and
                         approved by the Superintendent.
                            DRUG-FREE SCHOOLS REQUIREMENTS

   The District prohibits the unlawful distribution, possession, or use of illegal drugs,
   inhalants, and alcohol on school premises or as part of any of the District’s activities.
   Employees who violate this prohibition shall be subject to disciplinary sanctions. Such
   sanctions may include referral to drug and alcohol counseling or rehabilitation programs
   or employee assistance programs, termination from employment with the District, and
   referral to appropriate law enforcement officials for prosecution. [See policies at DH and
   DHE] 41 U.S.C. 702(a) (1) (A); 28 TAC 169.2
   Compliance with these requirements and prohibitions is mandatory and is a condition of
   employment.
   [This notice complies with notice requirements imposed by the federal Drug-Free
   Schools and Communities Act Amendments of 1989 (20 U.S.C. 3224a and 34 CFR
   86.201)]




   Reporting suspected child abuse
   Policy DG, DH, FFG, GRA

   All employees are required by state law to report any suspected child abuse or neglect to
   a law enforcement agency, Child Protective Services, or appropriate state agency (e.g.,
   state agency operating, licensing, certifying, or registering a facility) within 48 hours of
   the event that led to the suspicion. Reports to Child Protective Services can be made to
   Wilbarger County Sherriff or to the Texas Abuse Hotline (800-252-5400). State law
   specifies that an employee may not delegate to or rely on another person to make the
   report.

   Under state law, any person reporting or assisting in the investigation of reported child
   abuse or neglect is immune from liability unless the report is made in bad faith or with
   malicious intent. In addition, the district is prohibited from retaliating against an
   employee who, in good faith, reports child abuse or neglect or who participates in an
   investigation regarding an allegation of child abuse or neglect.

   An employee’s failure to report suspected child abuse may result in prosecution for the
   commission of a Class B misdemeanor. In addition, a certified employee’s failure to
   report suspected child abuse may result in disciplinary procedures by SBEC for a viola-
   tion of the Code of Ethics and Standard Practices for Texas Educators.
Employees who suspect that a student has been or may be abused or neglected should
also report their concerns to the campus principal. This includes students with disabilities
who are no longer minors. Employees are not required to report their concern to the prin-
cipal before making a report to the appropriate agencies. In addition, employees must
cooperate with child abuse and neglect investigators. Reporting the concern to the princi-
pal does not relieve the employee of the requirement to report to the appropriate state
agency. Interference with a child abuse investigation by denying an interviewer’s request
to interview a student at school or requiring the presence of a parent or school administra-
tor against the desires of the duly authorized investigator is prohibited.

Fraud and financial impropriety
Policy DG, CAA

All employees should act with integrity and diligence in duties involving the district’s
financial resources. The district prohibits fraud and financial impropriety, as defined
below. Fraud and financial impropriety includes, but is not limited to, the following:

    Forgery or unauthorized alteration of any document or account belonging to the
     district
    Forgery or unauthorized alteration of a check, bank draft, or any other financial
     document
    Misappropriation of funds, securities, supplies, or other district assets, including
     employee time
    Impropriety in the handling of money or reporting of district financial transactions
    Profiteering as a result of insider knowledge of district information or activities
    Unauthorized disclosure of confidential or proprietary information to outside parties
    Unauthorized disclosure of investment activities engaged in or contemplated by the
     district
    Accepting or seeking anything of material value from contractors, vendors, or other
     persons providing services or materials to the district
    Destroying, removing, or inappropriately using records, furniture, fixtures, or
     equipment
    Failing to provide financial records required by state or local entities
    Failure to disclose conflicts of interest as required by policy
    Any other dishonest act regarding the finances of the district

Conflict of interest
Policy BBFA, DBD

Employees are required to disclose to their supervisor any situation that creates a poten-
tial conflict of interest with proper discharge of assigned duties and responsibilities or
creates a potential conflict of interest with the best interests of the district. This includes
the following:
     A personal financial interest
     A business interest
     Any other obligation or relationship
An employee with a substantial interest in a business entity or interest in real property
must disclose the interest to the district prior to the award of a contract or authorization of
payment. This is done by filing an affidavit with James Rice. An employee is also con-
sidered to have substantial interest if a close family member (e.g., spouse, parent, child,
or spouse’s parent or child) has a substantial interest.

Gifts and favors
Policy DBD

Employees may not accept gifts or favors that could influence, or be construed to influ-
ence, the employee’s discharge of assigned duties. The acceptance of a gift, favor, or ser-
vice by an administrator or teacher that might reasonably tend to influence the selection
of textbooks may result in prosecution of a Class B misdemeanor offense. This does not
include staff development, teacher training, or instructional materials, such as maps or
worksheets, that convey information to students or contribute to the learning process.

Associations and political activities
Policy DGA

The district will not directly or indirectly discourage employees from participating in
political affairs or require any employee to join any group, club, committee, organization,
or association. Employees may join or refuse to join any professional association or orga-
nization.

An individual’s employment will not be affected by membership or a decision not to be a
member of any employee organization that exists for the purpose of dealing with employ-
ers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours of employment, or
conditions of work.

Use of district resources, including work time, for political activities is prohibited.

Safety
Policy CK

The district has developed and promotes a comprehensive program to ensure the safety of
its employees, students, and visitors. The safety program includes guidelines and proce-
dures for responding to emergencies and activities to help reduce the frequency of acci-
dents and injuries. To prevent or minimize injuries to employees, coworkers, and students
and to protect and conserve district equipment, employees must comply with the
following requirements:

   Observe all safety rules.
   Keep work areas clean and orderly at all times.
   Immediately report all accidents to their supervisor.
   Operate only equipment or machines for which they have training and authorization.

Employees with questions or concerns relating to safety programs and issues can contact
James Rice.

Tobacco use
Policies DH, GKA, FNCD

Smoking or using tobacco products is prohibited on all district-owned property and at
school-related or school-sanctioned activities, on or off campus. This includes all build-
ings, playground areas, parking facilities, and facilities used for athletics and other activ-
ities. Drivers of district-owned vehicles are prohibited from smoking while inside the
vehicle. Notices stating that smoking is prohibited by law and punishable by a fine are
displayed in prominent places in all school buildings.

Employee arrests and convictions
Policy DH

An employee must notify his or her principal or immediate supervisor within three calen-
dar days of any arrest, indictment, conviction, no contest or guilty plea, or other adjudica-
tion of any felony, any offense involving moral turpitude, and any of the other offenses
listed below:

   Crimes involving school property or funds
   Crimes involving attempt by fraudulent or unauthorized means to obtain or alter any
    certificate or permit that would entitle any person to hold or obtain a position as an
    educator
   Crimes that occur wholly or in part of school property or at a school-sponsored
    activity
   Crimes involving moral turpitude

Moral turpitude includes, but is not limited to, the following:

   Dishonesty
   Fraud
   Deceit
   Theft
   Misrepresentation
   Deliberate violence
   Base, vile, or depraved acts that are intended to arouse or gratify the sexual desire of
    the actor
   Drug- or alcohol-related offenses
   Acts constituting abuse under the Texas Family Code

Possession of firearms and weapons
Policies FNCG, GKA
Employees, visitors, and students are prohibited from bringing firearms, knives, clubs or
other prohibited weapons onto school premises (i.e., building or portion of a building) or
any grounds or building where a school-sponsored activity takes place. To ensure the
safety of all persons, employees who observe or suspect a violation of the district’s
weapons policy should report it to their supervisors or call James Rice immediately.

Visitors in the workplace
Policy GKC

All visitors are expected to enter any district facility through the main entrance and sign
in or report to the building’s main office. Authorized visitors will receive directions or be
escorted to their destination. Employees who observe an unauthorized individual on the
district premises should immediately direct him or her to the building office or contact
the administrator in charge.

Copyrighted materials
Policy EFE

Employees are expected to comply with the provisions of federal copyright law relating
to the unauthorized use, reproduction, distribution, performance, or display of
copyrighted materials (i.e., printed material, videos, computer data and programs, etc.).
Rented videotapes are to be used in the classroom for educational purposes only.
Duplication or backups of computer programs and data must be made within the
provisions of the purchase agreement.

Computer use and data management
Policy CQ

The district’s electronic communications systems, including its network access to the
Internet, is primarily for administrative and instructional purposes. Limited personal use
of the system is permitted if the use:

   Imposes no tangible cost to the district
   Does not unduly burden the district’s computer or network resources
   Has no adverse effect on job performance or on a student’s academic performance

Electronic mail transmissions and other use of the electronic communications systems are
not confidential and can be monitored at any time to ensure appropriate use.

Employees and students who are authorized to use the systems are required to abide by
the provisions of the district’s communications systems policy and administrative proce-
dures. Failure to do so can result in suspension or termination of privileges and may lead
to disciplinary action. Employees with questions about computer use and data manage-
ment can contact Phyllis Heath.
Asbestos management plan
Policy CKA

The district is committed to providing a safe environment for employees. An accredited
management planner has developed an asbestos management plan for each piece of
district property. A copy of the district’s management plan is kept in the Central
Administration office and is available for inspection during normal business hours.

Pest control treatment
Policy DI, CLB

Employees are prohibited from applying any pesticide or herbicide without appropriate
training and prior approval of the integrated pest management (IPM) coordinator. Any
application of pesticide or herbicide must be done in a manner prescribed by law and the
district’s integrated pest management program.

Notices of planned pest control treatment will be posted in a district building 48 hours
before the treatment begins. Notices are generally located at the Central Administration
office. Pest control information sheets are available from campus principals or facility
managers upon request.

Other topics


General procedures
Bad weather closing
Policy CKC

The district may close schools because of bad weather or emergency conditions. When
such conditions exist, the superintendent will make the official decision concerning the
closing of the district’s facilities. When it becomes necessary to open late or to release
students early, the following radio and television stations will be notified by school offi-
cials:


Emergencies
Policy CKC
Radio Station KVWC 103.1 FM Vernon TX
Television Kauz TV News Channel 6
www.northsideisd.us


All employees should be familiar with the evacuation diagrams posted in their work
areas. Fire, tornado, and other emergency drills will be conducted to familiarize employ-
ees and students with evacuation procedures. Fire extinguishers are located throughout all
district buildings. Employees should know the location of the extinguishers nearest their
place of work and how to use them.

Purchasing procedures
Policy CH

All requests for purchases must be submitted on an official district purchase order (PO)
form with the appropriate approval signatures. No purchases, charges, or commitments to
buy goods or services for the district can be made without a PO number. The district will
not reimburse employees or assume responsibility for purchases made without
authorization. Employees are not permitted to purchase supplies or equipment for
personal use through the district’s business office. Contact James Rice for additional
information on purchasing procedures.

Name and address changes
It is important that employment records be kept up to date. Employees must notify the
Central Administration office if there are any changes or corrections to their name, home
address, home telephone number, marital status, emergency contact, or beneficiary.

Personnel records
Policy GBA

Most district records, including personnel records, are public information and must be
released upon request. Employees may choose to have the following personal information
withheld:

   Address
   Phone number
   Social Security number
   Information that reveals whether they have family members

The choice to not allow public access to this information may be done at anytime by sub-
mitting a written request to the central administration office. New or terminating
employees have 14 days after hire or termination to submit a request. Otherwise, personal
information will be released to the public.

Building use
Policy GKD

Employees who wish to use district facilities after school hours must follow established
procedures. The Building Principal is responsible for scheduling the use of facilities after
school hours. Contact Mrs. Cindy Riggins to request to use school facilities and to obtain
information on the fees charged.
Termination of employment
Resignations
Policy DFE

Contract employees. Contract employees may resign their position without penalty at
the end of any school year if written notice is received 45 days before the first day of
instruction of the following school year. A written notice of resignation should be sub-
mitted to the Superintendent. Contract employees may resign at any other time only with
the approval of the board of trustees. Resignation without the consent of the board may
result in disciplinary action by the State Board for Educator Certification (SBEC).

The superintendent will notify SBEC when an employee resigns and reasonable evidence
exists to indicate that the employee has engaged in any of the acts listed in Reports to the
State Board for Educator Certification, on page 45.

Noncontract employees. Noncontract employees may resign their positions at any time.
A written notice of resignation should be submitted to James Rice at least two weeks
prior to the effective date. Employees are encouraged to include the reasons for leaving in
the letter of resignation but are not required to do so.

Dismissal or nonrenewal of contract employees
Policies DFAA, DFAB, DFBA, DFBB, DFCA, DFD, DFF

Employees on probationary, term, and continuing contracts can be dismissed during the
school year or nonrenewed at the end of the year according to the procedures outlined in
district policies. Contract employees dismissed during the school year, suspended without
pay, or subject to a reduction in force are entitled to receive notice of the recommended
action, an explanation of the charges against them, and an opportunity for a hearing. The
time lines and procedures to be followed when a suspension, termination, or nonrenewal
occurs will be provided when a written notice is given to an employee. Advance
notification requirements do not apply when a contract employee is dismissed for failing
to obtain or maintain appropriate certification or whose certification is revoked for
misconduct. Information on the time lines and procedures can be found in the DF series
policies that are provided to employees or in the policy manuals located in each office or
on-line at www.northsideisd.us .

Dismissal of noncontract employees
Policy DCD

Noncontract employees are employed at will and may be dismissed without notice, a
description of the reasons for dismissal, or a hearing. It is unlawful for the district to dis-
miss any employee for reasons of race, religion, sex, national origin, disability, military
status, any other basis protected by law, or in retaliation for the exercise of certain pro-
tected legal rights. Noncontract employees who are dismissed have the right to grieve the
termination. The dismissed employee must follow the district process outlined in this
handbook when pursuing the grievance. (See Complaints and grievances, page 22.)

Exit interviews and procedures
Policy DC

Exit interviews will be scheduled for all employees leaving the district. Information on
the continuation of benefits, release of information, and procedures for requesting refer-
ences will be provided at this time. Separating employees are asked to provide the district
with a forwarding address and phone number and complete a questionnaire that provides
the district with feedback on his or her employment experience.

All district keys, books, property, and equipment must be returned upon separation from
employment. The district may withhold the cost of any unreturned items from the final
paycheck.

Reports to State Board for Educator Certification
Policy DF

The dismissal or resignation of a certified employee will be reported to the SBEC when
the superintendent first learns about an alleged incident of conduct that involves the fol-
lowing:

   Any form of sexual or physical abuse of a minor or any other illegal conduct with a
    student or a minor
   The possession, transfer, sale, or distribution of a controlled substance
   The illegal transfer, appropriation, or expenditure of school property or funds
   An attempt by fraudulent or unauthorized means to obtain or alter any certificate or
    permit that would entitle the individual to a professional position or to receive
    additional compensation associated with a position
   Committing a crime on school property or at a school-sponsored event
   Violating assessment instrument security procedures

Reports concerning court-ordered withholding
The district is required to report the termination of employees that are under court order
or writ of withholding for child support or spousal maintenance to the court and the indi-
vidual receiving the support (Texas Family Code §8.210, 158.211). Notice of the follow-
ing must be sent to the court and support recipient:

   Termination of employment not later than the seventh day after the date of termi-
    nation
   Employee’s last known address
   Name and address of the employee’s new employer, if known
Student issues
Equal educational opportunities
Policy FB

The Northside ISD does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, or disability in providing education services, activities, and programs,
including vocational programs, in accordance with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964, as amended; Title IX of the Educational Amendments of 1972; and Section 504 of
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended.


Questions or concerns about discrimination of students on any of the bases listed above
should be directed to James Rice.

Student records
Policy FL

Student records are confidential and are protected from unauthorized inspection or use.
Employees should take precautions to maintain the confidentiality of all student records.
The following people are the only people who have general access to a student’s records:
Parents Married, separated, or divorced unless parental rights have been legally
terminated and the school has been given a copy of the court order terminating parental
rights

The student (if 18 or older or emancipated by a court)
School officials with legitimate educational interests

The student handbook provides parents and students with detailed information on student
records. Parents or students who want to review student records should be directed to the
campus principal for assistance.

Parent and student complaints
Policy FNG

In an effort to hear and resolve parent and student complaints in a timely manner and at
the lowest administrative level possible, the board has adopted orderly processes for han-
dling complaints on different issues. Any campus office or the superintendent’s office
can provide parents and students with information on filing a complaint.

Parents are encouraged to discuss problems or complaints with the teachers or the appro-
priate administrator at any time. Parents and students with complaints that cannot be
resolved to their satisfaction should be directed to the campus principal. The formal
complaint process provides parents and students with an opportunity to be heard up to the
highest level of management if they are dissatisfied with a principal’s response.

Administering medication to students
Policy FFAC

Only designated employees can administer prescription medication, nonprescription
medication, and herbal or dietary supplements to students. A student who must take
medication during the school day must bring a written request from his or her parent and
the medicine, in its original, properly labeled container. Contact the principal or school
nurse for information on procedures that must be followed when administering
medication to students.

Dietary supplements
Policy DH, FFAC

District employees are prohibited by state law from knowingly selling, marketing, or dis-
tributing a dietary supplement that contains performance-enhancing compounds to a stu-
dent with whom the employee has contact as part of his or her school district duties. In
addition, employees may not knowingly endorse or suggest the ingestion, intranasal
application, or inhalation of a performance-enhancing dietary supplement to any student.

Psychotropic drugs
Policy FFAC

A psychotropic drug is a substance used in the diagnosis, treatment, or prevention of a
disease or as a component of a medication. It is intended to have an altering effect on
perception, emotion, or behavior and is commonly described as a mood- or behavior-
altering substance.

District employees are prohibited by state law from doing the following:

   Recommending that a student use a psychotropic drug
   Suggesting a particular diagnosis
   Excluding from class or school-related activity a student whose parent refuses to
    consent to a psychiatric evaluation or to authorize the administration of a psycho-
    tropic drug to a student

Student discipline
Policies in the FN series and FO series

Students are expected to follow the classroom rules, campus rules, and rules listed in the
Student Handbook and Student Code of Conduct. Teachers and administrators are
responsible for taking disciplinary action based on a range of discipline management
strategies that have been adopted by the district. Other employees that have concerns
about a particular student’s conduct should contact the classroom teacher or campus prin-
cipal.

Student attendance
Policy FDD

Teachers and staff should be familiar with the district’s policies and procedures for atten-
dance accounting. These procedures require minor students to have parental consent
before they are allowed to leave campus. When absent from school, the student, upon
returning to school, must bring a note signed by the parent that describes the reason for
the absence. These requirements are addressed in campus training and in the student
handbook. Contact the campus principal for additional information.

Hazing
Policy FNCC, FO
Students must have prior approval from the principal or designee for any type of “initia-
tion rites” of a school club or organization. Any teacher, administrator, or employee who
observes a student engaged in any form of hazing, who has reason to know or suspect
that a student intends to engage in hazing, or has engaged in hazing must report that fact
or suspicion to the designated campus discipline person.

Index
A
Administering medication to students
Administration
Alcohol and drug testing
Arrests and convictions
Asbestos management plan
Assault leave
Associations
At-will employment
Automatic payroll deposits
B
Bad weather closing
Benefits
   cafeteria plan
   continuation
   leave
   other
   teacher retirement
   workers’ compensation
Bereavement leave
Board
   meeting schedule
   members
   of trustees
Building use
C
Cafeteria plan benefits
Certification
   first aid and CPR
   parent notification
Change of address
Child abuse reporting
Code of ethics
Committees
Communication
Compensation
Complaints
   employee
   parent and student
Compliance coordinators
Computer use
Conflict of interest
Contract
   employment
   noncertified employees
Copyrighted materials
Court appearances
Court-ordered withholdings
D
Data management
Dietary supplements
Directories
   helpful contacts
   school
Disclaimer
Dismissal
   contract employees
   noncontract employees
District
   communications
   goals and objectives
   information
   map
   mission statement
Drug-abuse prevention
Drugs, psychotropic
E
Emergencies
Employee
   conduct and welfare
   involvement
   recognition
Employment
   after retirement
   at-will
   contract
   decisions
   outside
Equal educational opportunities
Equal employment opportunity
Exit interviews
F
Family and medical leave
Firearms
Fraud
G
General procedures
Gifts and favors
Goals and objectives
Grievances
H
Handbook
   application
   design
   distribution
   legal considerations
   legal review
Harassment
   student
Hazing
Health insurance
Helpful contacts
I
Insurance
    health, dental, and life
    supplemental
    unemployment
    workers’ compensation
J
Job vacancy announcements
Jury duty
L
Leave
   accrual
   assault
   bereavement
   court appearances
   discretionary
   family and medical
   jury duty
   local
   medical certification
   military
   nondiscretionary
   personal
   sick
   temporary disability
   workers’ compensation
Leaves and absences
M
Medications
Military leave
Mission statement
N
Name and address changes
No Child Left Behind Act
Nonrenewal
O
Outside employment
Overtime
   compensatory time off
   defined
   pay
P
Parent and student complaints
Parent notification
Paychecks
    deductions
Payroll
    schedule
    statements
Performance evaluation
Personal leave
Personnel records
Pest control treatment
Policy changes
Political activities
Possession of weapons
Psychotropic drugs
Publications
Purchasing procedures
R
Reassignments
Reports to SBEC
Resignations
   contract employees
   noncontract employees
Retirement
   benefits
   employment
S
Safety
Salaries
School
    calendar
    closing
    director
Sexual Harassment
Sick leave
Staff development
Standards of conduct
Stipends
Student
    attendance
    complaints
    discipline
    issues
    medication
    records
Student harassment
Supplemental insurance
T
Teacher retirement
Temporary disability leave
Termination
   dismissal during the contract term
   exit interviews
   noncontract employees
   nonrenewal
   reports
   reports to SBEC
   resignations
Tobacco use
Transfers
Travel expense reimbursement
Tutoring
U
Unemployment compensation insurance
V
Visitors
W
Wages
Weapons
Workers’ compensation
  benefits
  insurance
Employee handbook receipt
Name ______________________________________

Campus/department ___________________________

I hereby acknowledge receipt of my personal copy of the Northside ISD Employee Hand-
book. I agree to read the handbook and abide by the standards, policies, and procedures
defined or referenced in this document.

Employees have the option of receiving the handbook in electronic format or hard copy.

Please indicate your choice by checking the appropriate box below:

 I choose to receive the employee handbook in electronic format and accept
  responsibility for accessing according to the instructions provided.

 I choose to receive a hard copy of the employee handbook.

The information in this handbook is subject to change. I understand that changes in dis-
trict policies may supersede, modify, or render obsolete the information summarized in
this booklet. As the district provides updated policy information, I accept responsibility
for reading and abiding by the changes.

I understand that no modifications to contractual relationships or alterations of at-will
employment relationships are intended by this handbook.

I understand that I have an obligation to inform my supervisor or department head of any
changes in personal information, such as phone number, address, etc. I also accept
responsibility for contacting my supervisor or the superintendent if I have questions or
concerns or need further explanation.

________________________________              _________________________
Signature                                     Date

Note: You have been given two copies of this form. Please sign and date one and keep it.
Sign and date the other copy and forward it to the building Principal.
Employee handbook receipt
Name ______________________________________

Campus/department ___________________________

I hereby acknowledge receipt of my personal copy of the Northside ISD Employee Hand-
book. I agree to read the handbook and abide by the standards, policies, and procedures
defined or referenced in this document.

Employees have the option of receiving the handbook in electronic format or hard copy.

Please indicate your choice by checking the appropriate box below:

 I choose to receive the employee handbook in electronic format and accept
  responsibility for accessing according to the instructions provided.

 I choose to receive a hard copy of the employee handbook.

The information in this handbook is subject to change. I understand that changes in dis-
trict policies may supersede, modify, or render obsolete the information summarized in
this booklet. As the district provides updated policy information, I accept responsibility
for reading and abiding by the changes.

I understand that no modifications to contractual relationships or alterations of at-will
employment relationships are intended by this handbook.

I understand that I have an obligation to inform my supervisor or department head of any
changes in personal information, such as phone number, address, etc. I also accept
responsibility for contacting my supervisor or the superintendent if I have questions or
concerns or need further explanation.

________________________________              _________________________
Signature                                     Date

Note: You have been given two copies of this form. Please sign and date one and keep it.
Sign and date the other copy and forward it to the building Principal.
