            AGREEMENT

               Between

THE SCHOOL BOARD OF PINELLAS COUNTY,
              FLORIDA

                 And

 THE PINELLAS CLASSROOM TEACHERS
    ASSOCIATION, INCORPORATED

         2015 2018 – 20182021
             AGREEMENT
THE SCHOOL BOARD OF PINELLAS COUNTY, FLORIDA, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
and the PINELLAS CLASSROOM TEACHERS ASSOCIATION, INC., hereinafter referred to as the
UnionAssociation, recognizing that the welfare and best interest of public education in Pinellas
County, Florida, will be served by procedures which provide for an orderly method for the BOARD
and the UnionASSOCIATION to bargain, in good faith, matters of common interest and to work
toward a mutually satisfactory written agreement on these matters, do hereby agree as follows:

                           ARTICLE 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

A.      The Board and the UnionAssociation recognize that the Board has certain powers,
        discretions and duties that under the laws and Constitution of the state of Florida may not
        be delegated, limited or abrogated by agreement with any party. Accordingly, if any
        provision of this Agreement or any application of this Agreement to any teacher covered
        hereby shall be found contrary to law, such provision or application shall have effect only
        to the extent permitted by law, but all other provisions or application of this Agreement
        shall continue in full force and effect.

B.      This Agreement shall be governed and construed according to the Constitution, laws, and
        regulations of the state of Florida.

C.      This Agreement constitutes the official position of the Board for the term of said Agreement.
        The Board empowers the Superintendent to execute the terms of the Agreement. The
        Superintendent and the UnionAssociation will carry out the commitments contained herein
        and give them full force and effect.

D.      All the rights and privileges granted under the terms and provisions of this Agreement are
        for the use of all employees in the bargaining unit.

E.      The provisions of this Agreement shall be incorporated by reference into each teacher's
        individual contract and all holders of said contract shall be made aware of the agents
        responsible for this Agreement.

F.      The parties agree as provided for above that this Agreement constitutes the full
        understanding of the parties. Accordingly, in fulfillment of the provision of F.S. 447 the
        parties are in accord that matters affecting the status of members of this unit have been
        discussed and are contained herein. Should it become necessary to alter the programs
        and/or personnel configurations within the district, the parties mutually agree that the
        impact of any such changes will be discussed with the Union Association prior to any
        action being taken by the Board.


                                  ARTICLE 2 OBJECTIVES

A.     To coordinate the combined efforts of all concerned toward achieving the best possible
       education for each student in the county to the maximum of the student's capacity.




                                                 2
B.   To provide a definite procedure for the bargaining of salaries, working conditions, and other
     conditions of employment for teachers.

C.   To commit to a written agreement to be available online at both the PCTA and PCS
     websites.

D.   To improve Teacher-Administrator-Board relationships and communications within the
     school system.

                                    ARTICLE 3 RECOGNITION

A.   The Board recognizes the Union Association as the exclusive bargaining agent for salaries,
     working conditions, and other terms and conditions of employment for teachers who are
     employed by the School Board of Pinellas County, Florida. The term “teachers” includes
     all full-time certified instructional personnel including but not limited to: itinerant personnel,
     media specialist, school psychologist, speech language pathologist, classroom teacher,
     school guidance counselor, occupational specialist, social worker, curriculum assistant,
     curriculum coordinator, learning disability specialist, diversified education coordinator,
     vocational teacher coordinator, health coordinator, secondary education coordinator, work
     experience teacher, adult home economics teacher, and other personnel included on the
     instructional personnel list who do not effectively recommend hiring and/or firing or
     effectuate budgetary policy (or reasonably influence budget structure).

B.   Recognition of the UnionAssociation as the exclusive bargaining representative does not in
     any way preclude the individual right of any classroom teacher to present a request or
     opinion to the Board or Administration through any available channel. The Board and the
     UnionAssociation agree that neither will discriminate for or against any teacher in any
     matter relevant to salary or conditions of employment because of membership or non-
     membership in the UnionAssociation. Teachers have the right to join or refrain from joining,
     forming, or assisting professional organizations.

C.   The Union Association agrees that under no circumstances will it or any of its members
     authorize, sanction, condone or acquiesce in, nor will any member of the bargaining unit
     take part in any strike or work stoppage of any kind or nature. Strikes and work stoppages
     shall be deemed to include, but are not limited to: slow down, sit-ins, concerted mass
     sickness or any curtailment of work or interference with the operation of the school district
     including picketing or demonstrating of any kind during school hours. The Union
     Association further agrees that it will not engage in any sanctioned activities or other types
     of boycott.

D.   In the event of any action in violation of this provision the UnionAssociation will post notices
      immediately at any and all schools affected, advising that such action is unlawful, in
      violation of this Agreement, and unauthorized by the UnionAssociation. The Union
      Association shall further advise any and all teachers involved, including notification to the
      communications and news media, if requested by the Board, that all teachers involved shall
      return forthwith to their regular duties. The Union Association shall further be expected to




                                                 3
     take any and all other reasonable actions within its power to stop the activity. If the
     UnionAssociation takes the foregoing steps and has not acted in violation of its obligation
     under the Agreement, it shall not be liable in any way for such activities.

E.   The Board shall have the right to discipline, including discharge, any teacher for taking part
     in any violation of this provision. In addition, any teacher or teachers violating this provision
     may be held liable by the Board for any and all damages, injuries and costs incurred. Prior
     to the taking of disciplinary or other action enumerated herein, the Board shall notify the
     UnionAssociation of its intentions and may also consult with the UnionAssociation in
     connection therewith. It is expected that the UnionAssociation will act to discipline its
     members pursuant to disciplinary procedures within the Union’sAssociation's constitution
     and/or bylaws. In the event that the UnionAssociation does not adhere to, or abide by this
     provision, it shall be liable for any and all damages, injuries and costs incurred by the Board.


                      ARTICLE 4 BARGAINING PROCEDURES

A.   All bargaining shall be conducted in accordance with Part II of Chapter 447, Florida Statutes,
     and the rules of the Public Employees Relations Commission, in a manner, which assures
     the implementation of Article I, Section 6 of the Constitution of the state of Florida.

B.   The parties mutually agree that the terms and conditions set forth herein represent the full
     and complete understanding between the parties; except as may be amended as provided
     for in Article 6, Section A, that all negotiable items have been discussed leading to this
     Agreement. The parties have adopted a Collaborative Bargaining model with the mission
     to continuously refine a process to identify and meet the needs of educational stakeholders
     using a collaborative approach to attain common goals through continual quality
     improvement.

C.   The Collaborative Bargaining Team’s mission to continually refine a process to identify and
     meet the needs of educational stakeholders using a collaborative approach to attain
     common goals through continual improvement provides the foundation and direction by
     which the sub committees function. The Bargaining Leadership Team supports the
     bargaining process by clarifying expectations, coordinating recommendations, and
     ensuring the availability and utilization of information systems. Dates of bargaining sessions
     shall be established so as to expeditiously promote the achievement of agreement. Both
     parties shall endeavor to minimize the possibility of impasse. The Board agrees that, acting
     in good faith, it will not attempt to control the bargaining process through the premature
     adoption of a budget. Nevertheless, the parties understand that bargaining should not
     restrict the Board from its statutory obligation to prepare and submit a budget.

D.   Two subcommittees, Employee Well-Being and Satisfaction, and Employee Education and
     Training, in addition to the Bargaining Leadership Team will meet as needed for the
     purpose of reviewing the administration of the Agreement and to resolve problems that
     might arise. These meetings are not intended to bypass the grievance procedure. Should
     such a meeting result in a mutually acceptable amendment to the Agreement, then the




                                                4
     amendment shall be subject to ratification by the Board and the Union Association.

E.   Employee Well-Being and Satisfaction Committee - The parties agree to convene, as
     needed, the Employee Well-Being and Satisfaction Committee composed of
     representatives of the administration, instructional, and supporting services personnel. The
     committee shall be charged with reviewing the present group insurance programs and
     examining possible alternatives for future consideration.

F.   Designated representatives of the Board and the UnionAssociation agree to meet at a time
     and place which is acceptable to both negotiation teams. Each party agrees to certify its
     representatives to the other and to authorize said representatives to reach agreement
     subject to ratification.

G.   The parties to collective bargaining may call upon consultants to assist in preparing for
     bargaining and to advise them during conference sessions. The Executive Director of the
     Union Association and the Superintendent of Schools may attend at any time.

H.   Either party desiring to submit proposals for bargaining shall so notify the other party in
     writing during the calendar year in which the proposals are intended to become effective.
     Upon tender and receipt of such notification, representatives of the parties shall meet for
     bargaining as provided in this Article. 4 of this Agreement.

I.   During the bargaining process, either party may, with advance notice, request and receive
     from the other party information directly pertinent to matters under consideration.

J.   When consensus is reached covering the areas submitted to negotiations, the proposed
     agreement shall be reduced to writing and submitted to the Board and the teachers for
     ratification. Until ratification by both parties has been accomplished, the aAgreement shall
     have no power or effect.

K.   Until agreement on all issues under consideration is reached, neither party shall be bound
     by tentative agreements on certain articles of the total package.

L.   No change, rescission, alteration, or modification of this Agreement, in whole or in part,
     shall be valid unless the same is ratified by the Board and the UnionAssociation and
     endorsed in writing herein.

M.   If either party refuses to ratify the Agreement reached by the negotiation teams, the rejecting
     party shall state in writing to the other party the reasons for rejection. Said notification of
     the failure to ratify shall result in the resumption of negotiations within seven calendar days.
     When both parties approve the negotiated Agreement, upon receipt of official action by the
     teachers, the Board at the next official meeting will take action to adopt the Agreement.

N.   The parties agree to negotiate in good faith to reach agreements which are in the best
     interest of education.

O.   In the event that impasse is declared by either side, said impasse shall be resolved




                                                5
        according to the rules of the Public Employees Relations Commission.

P.     Negotiations shall be conducted at a time acceptable to the parties. Should such time
       conflict with the normal school day, representatives of the UnionAssociation shall be
       granted temporary duty elsewhere leave.

Q.      Should negotiations be completed after the start of a fiscal year, benefits agreed to under
        the terms of the settlement shall apply for the entire fiscal year unless expressly agreed to
        by the parties. In order for an employee to be eligible for retroactive salary/benefits, the
        employee must be on active pay status at the time this Agreement is ratified by both parties.

R.        The Board agrees to the Union’s involvement in the school calendar. [not new, moved
        from article 39]

                           ARTICLE 5 MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

Except as expressly provided otherwise in this Agreement, the determination and administration of
school policy, the operation and management of the schools and the direction of employees are
vested exclusively in the Board.

                                   ARTICLE 6 DURATION

This Agreement shall become effective on the 1st day of July, 20185, and shall continue in full force
aand effect until the 30th day of June, 202118, unless amended as herein provided. The 2011-
2012
contract period was a continuation of the 2008-2011 bargaining agreement.                               Formatted: Normal, Space After: 0 pt, Pattern: Clear
                                                                                                        (White), Position: Horizontal: Left, Relative to: Column,
                                                                                                        Vertical: In line, Relative to: Margin, Width: Auto,
                                                                                                        Height: Auto, Wrap Around
A.     The Agreement mayshall be amended at any time during its term by mutual consent and
       ratification of parties as provided in Article 4 of this Agreement. However, the                 Formatted: Normal, Space After: 0 pt, Pattern: Clear
       Administration and Board may stipulate on matters not expressly provided for in the              (White), Position: Horizontal: Left, Relative to: Column,
                                                                                                        Vertical: In line, Relative to: Margin, Width: Auto,
       Agreement by means of a written memorandum of understanding between the Board and
                                                                                                        Height: Auto, Wrap Around
       the UnionAssociation. A memorandum of understanding is binding upon execution by the
       Superintendent and the Union Association President but requires subsequent ratification
       unless its duration is for a period of one year or less.

B.     Either party desiring renewal of this Agreement may do so by giving written notification to
       the other party at any time not less than sixty (60) calendar days in advance of this
       termination date. A notification given under this provision must include a complete
       statement of the reason or reasons upon which the renewal is based.

C.     The parties agree to continuously monitor the district budget and at the earliest possible
       time to reopen negotiations on salaries, economic benefits, and teaching hours and
       loads, with the joint goal of restoring any lost step increments as soon as it becomes
       financially feasible.

D.     The parties agree to continue to negotiate the following specific issues during the 2015-




                                                 6
        2016 school year:

Supplemental Salary- the parties agree to convene a committee to review current supplemental
positions and make recommendations by April 1,2016, related to salaries for these supplemental
positionsVirtual Teachers- the parties agree to continue negotiations related to virtual teachers
and any terms and conditions of employment specific to virtual teachers.
                          ARTICLE 7 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

Section A. DEFINITIONS:

1.     A "grievance" is a complaint by a teacher or group of teachers based on an alleged violation,
misinterpretation, or inequitable application of the provisions of this Agreement.

2.    The "aggrieved" is a person or group of persons making the complaint. It will be used
synonymously with the term "grievant."

3.     A "party in interest" is the person or persons making the complaint and any person or
persons who might be required to take action or against whom action might be taken in order to
resolve the problem.

4.     The term "days" when used in this article shall, except where otherwise indicated, mean
working school days.

5.     "UnionAssociation" shall mean the Pinellas Classroom Teachers Association.

6.     "Board" shall mean the School Board of Pinellas County, Florida.

Section B. PURPOSES:
1.      The purpose of this procedure is to secure, at the lowest possible level, equitable solutions
to the problems or grievances, which may from time to time arise.

2.     Both parties agree that these proceedings shall be kept as informal and confidential as may
be appropriate at any level of the procedure.

3.     Nothing contained herein shall be construed as limiting the right of any teacher having a
grievance to discuss the matter informally with any appropriate member of the Administration or
with any appropriate representative of the UnionAssociation at any time.

Section C. TIME LIMITS:

1.        Since it is important that a grievance be processed as rapidly as possible, the number of
days indicated at any level should be considered as a maximum, and every effort should be made
to expedite the process. In order for a grievance to come within the scope of the grievance
procedure outlined herein, it must be filed within thirty (30) working days of the day of the event
giving rise to the grievance unless an extension is mutually agreed upon in writing. The deadline
for filing a grievance shall be automatically extended if the incident that gave rise to the grievance
was predicated upon a district level decision, which was not made known to the grievant until after




                                                  7
the thirty-day time limit had expired.

2.     In the event that a grievance is filed on or after April 15, the time limits set forth herein
should be reduced so that the grievance procedure may be exhausted prior to the end of the school
term.

Section D. PROCEDURES:

The parties agree that it is most desirable for an employee and the immediate supervisor to whom
the employee is responsible to discuss concerns the matter informally in an effort to resolve any
issues. the problem. An UnionAssociation representative may be requested to assist in the
employee’s informal discussions efforts to resolve the problem informally with the principal or
appropriate supervisor and a meeting should be scheduled as expeditiously as possible.. The
Association will provide an opportunity for a meeting with the grievant to discuss the merits of the
case within five (5) days after receiving notice of the grievance. Should informal discussions
procedures fail to satisfy the aggrieved person, then the following procedures will be used for the
employee to file a grievance: shall be formally processed as follows:

LEVEL 1.        The grievant, with the assistance of the UnionAssociation, shall create a written
                grievance and present it to the grievant’s immediate supervisor who will arrange for
                a meeting within five (5) days after receipt of the grievance. Under no circumstances
                will a grievance be accepted at this level, which is not timely filed pursuant to
                Section C. 1. of this article. The grievant, an Union Association Representative, and
                the supervisor to whom the teacher is responsible shall be present for the meeting.
                The administration may invite other administrators to the meeting (e.g., an area
                superintendent). The supervisor must provide the Union Association and the
                grievant a written answer on the grievance within threefive (53) days from the date
                of said meeting.

LEVEL 2.       If the UnionAssociation is not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance at Level
                1, it shall notify the office of Human Resources within tenfive (105) days of receipt
                of the Level 1 response and expeditiously schedule a Level 2 hearing at a date and
                time mutually acceptable to the Board and the UnionAssociation. Under no
                circumstances will a grievance be accepted at this level which is not timely filed
                pursuant to this section.

LEVEL 3.       If the Union Association is not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance at Level
                2, or if the time limit for a response at Level 2 has expired without the issuance of
                the Superintendent's written answer, the grievance may be filed within forty-five
                ninety (4590) days for final and binding arbitration according to the rules of the
                American Arbitration Association or the rules of the Federal Mediation and
                Conciliations Service (FMCS). Under no circumstances will a grievance be
                accepted at this level which is not timely filed pursuant to this section.

The above time limits may be extended by mutual consent of the parties to facilitate resolution or
due to extenuating circumstances.




                                                  8
Section E. COSTS:

1.      Should either party request a transcript of the proceedings at Level 3, then the party shall
bear the full costs of the transcript. If each party requests a transcript, the cost of the two transcripts
will be divided equally between the parties.


2.      Grievance arbitration expense shall be borne equally by the parties.

3.    Each party shall bear the full cost of its representation at all levels of the grievance
procedure.


Section F. MISCELLANEOUS:

1.     The parties will cooperate in the investigation of any grievance and provide all pertinent
information as may be requested for the processing of any grievance.

2.     No reprisals of any kind shall be taken against any party in interest participating in the
grievance procedure.

3.      Decisions rendered at each level of the formal procedure shall be in writing and shall set
forth the reasons therefore.

4.      Records relating to the processing of any grievance shall be placed in a separate grievance
file.

5.      No teacher shall be required to discuss a grievance if an UnionAssociation representative
is not present.

6.      Forms and other necessary documents for filing and processing grievances shall be jointly
developed by the Board and the Union Association. Said forms shall provide for naming the specific
Board policy or Agreement provision which is alleged to have been violated and a summary of the
facts. The official grievance form Forms will be made available to teachers by both parties.

7.      In order to prevent the filing of a multiplicity of grievances on the same question of
interpretation or compliance and/or where the grievance covers a question common to a number
of teachers, it shall be processed as a single grievance. Any group grievance shall set forth thereon
the names of the persons of the group and the title and specific assignments of the people covered
by the group grievance.as well as the facts supporting the alleged violation.

8.     Grievances arising at a level other than the building level shall be processed in the same
manner as building grievances except that the grievance will be initiated with the appropriate county
administrator rather than with the principal.

9.      The Union Association reserves the right to initiate grievances on behalf of groups or
individuals without direct consent.




                                                    9
10.      As provided for by law, the UnionAssociation reserves the right to exclusive management
of the grievance procedure. The Union Association shall determine the extent of its involvement in
all grievances initiated by members of the unit.                                                      Formatted: Default Paragraph Font, Font color: Auto,
                                                                                                      Pattern: Clear (White)
11.     The parties agree that the grievance process requires open and honest communication and       Formatted: Normal, Left, Indent: Left: 0.5", Don't add
shall not be used by the administrator or the Union representative as a means of harassment or        space between paragraphs of the same style, Line
intimidation.                                                                                         spacing: single, No bullets or numbering, Tab stops:
                                                                                                      Not at 0.47"
10.12. The arbitrator shall have no power to alter, add to or subtract from the terms of this         Formatted: Normal, Left, Indent: Left: 0.5", Don't add
Agreement.                                                                                            space between paragraphs of the same style, Line
                                                                                                      spacing: single, No bullets or numbering, Tab stops:
                                                                                                      Not at 0.47"
                            ARTICLE 8 LEAVES OF ABSENCE

A.     Leave of Absence for Medical or Related Reasons

Employees are entitled to a leave of absence from work in accordance with this Article and the
Family Medical and Leave Act (“FMLA”).

       1.      Sick Leave. Each full-time employee shall be entitled to four (4) days of sick leave
               as of the first day of employment of each school year. Thereafter employees will
               earn one (1) day of sick leave for each month of employment, for a total often (10)
               sick days per current year for a ten (10) month contract, eleven (11) for eleven
               (11) month contract, and twelve (12) for 235 day employees, which shall be
               credited to the employee at the end of that month, and which shall not be used
               prior to the time it is earned and credited to the employee. Should an employee
               terminate or otherwise enter an unpaid leave status, upon termination or leave,
               the employee shall be entitled to payment only for one (1) day times the number
               of months actually worked in the school year in computing final compensation.
               Accumulated sick leave may be transferred from another Florida county upon
               request of the employee.

               a.     Sick Leave is to be used for illness of the employee or illness or death of
                      an immediate family member and includes medical and related
                      appointments. Immediate family shall include the father, mother, sister,
                      brother, husband, wife, child, mother-in-law, father-in-law, son-in-law,
                      daughter-in-law, nephew, niece, aunt, uncle, foster children, step-parents,
                      step-children, grandparents, grandchildren, or a member of his/her own
                      household,. As well as anyone for whom the employee is a legal guardian.
                      Such leave shall be in increments of one-half day or one full day. Sick
                      Leave is not to be used as a substitute for vacation or personal time.

               b.     Any employee who finds it necessary to be absent from his/her position
                      because of illness shall notify his/her immediate supervisor before the work
                      day begins if possible. If not possible, notification should be made as soon
                      thereafter as possible.




                                                10
2.   Qualifying Reasons and Length of FMLA and Military Family Leave. Under FMLA,
     eligible employees may take up to twelve (12) work weeks of job-protected,
     unpaid leave, or substitute appropriate paid leave if the employee has earned or
     accrued it, for the following reasons:

     a.     the birth and/or care of a newborn child of the staff member, within one (1)
            year of the child's birth;

     b.     the placement with the staff member of a child for adoption or foster care,
            within one (1) year of the child's arrival;

     c.     the staff member is needed to provide physical and/or psychological care
            for a spouse, child, or parent with a serious health condition;

     d.     the staff member's own serious health condition makes him/her unable to
            perform the functions of his/her position; or

     e.     any qualifying exigency (as defined in applicable Federal regulations)
            arising out of the fact that the staff member's spouse, son, daughter, or
            parent is a covered military member (i.e., a member of the National Guard
            or Reserves, but not a member of the Regular Armed Forces) on active
            duty (or has been notified of an impending call or order to active duty) in
            support of a contingency operation ("Qualifying Exigency Leave").

3.   Military Caregiver Leave under FMLA. In addition, an eligible employee who is a
     spouse, son, daughter, parent, or next of kin of a covered service member with a
     serious injury or illness may take up to a total of twenty-six (26) work weeks of job-
     protected, unpaid leave, or substitute appropriate paid leave if the staff member
     has earned or accrued it, during a "single twelve (12) month period" to provide
     physical and/or psychological care for the covered service member. A covered
     service member is defined as a current member of the Armed Forces, including a
     member of the National Guard or Reserves, who is undergoing medical treatment,
     recuperation, or therapy, is otherwise in outpatient status, or is otherwise on the
     temporary disability retired list, for a serious injury or illness. Serious injury or
     illness for purposes of Military Caregiver Leave is defined as an injury or illness
     incurred by a service member in the line of duty on active duty that may render the
     service member medically unfit to perform the duties of his/her office, grade, rank,
     or rating. The "single twelve (12) month period" for leave to care for a covered
     service member with a serious injury or illness begins the first day the staff
     member takes leave for this reason and ends twelve (12) months later, regardless
     of the twelve (12) month period established below for general FMLA leave. During
     the "single twelve (12) month period", an eligible staff member is limited to a
     combined total of twenty-six (26) work weeks of unpaid leave for any FMLA-
     qualifying reason. (Only twelve (12) of the twenty-six (26) work weeks total may
     be for a FMLA-qualifying reason other than to care for a covered service
     member.)

4.   Extended Leave. Any employee who has exhausted his/her FMLA, Military




                                      11
            Caregiver Leave or any other leave approved under this Article may extend the
            leave for an additional twelve (12) week period or the end of the school year,
            whichever is longer, provided that satisfactory evidence that the qualifying reason
            described above, continues. If the FMLA leave was granted for reasons described
            in (a) and (b) above, however, the leave may be extended for longer of the twelve
            (12) week period or the end of the school year, to provide for child care. In all
            cases where an employee is on an extended leave:

            a.     The employee will be returned to the same or similar position upon return
                   from leave.

            b.     While on an extended leave of absence without pay, employees are required
                   to pay the entire cost of the insurance premium for coverage to continue.

B.   Leave of Absence for Other Reasons

     1.     Personal Leave. Employees are entitled to four (4) days leave of absence for
            personal reasons, charged to unused sick leave.

            a.     Notice of intent to take personal leave shall be made to the principal/
                   supervisor two (2) days in advance, unless an emergency condition
                   prevails. The principal shall have the final say as to whether an emergency
                   condition exists.

            b.     Principals/supervisors shall have the right to request reasons for personal
                   leave and to deny such leave only when personal leave is being requested
                   on an inservice/staff development day or pre- and post-holidays.

            c.     Personal leaves shall be for a period not less than one-half (1/2) of the
                   assigned teacher work day.

            d.     Personal leave shall not be cumulative from year to year, and should be
                   used for personal business arising from extenuating circumstances.

     2.     Military Leave. Military leave with pay may be granted to an employee when the
            request is supported by a copy of the military orders, in accordance with the
            provisions of Section 250.48, Florida Statutes.

     3.     Illness in the Line of Duty. Any employee who must be absent from duty because
            of personal injury received in the discharge of duties or because of illness certified
            by a physician from contagious disease contracted in school work shall be entitled
            to illness in the line of duty leave in accordance with Section 1012.63, Florida
            Statutes.

     4.     UnionAssociation President. The President of the UnionAssociation shall be
            granted temporary duty different from his/her regular duties and place of
            employment for the purpose of performing other educational services and
            attending professional meetings. Such duties shall be considered equal to the
            regular duties of the individual performing such assigned temporary duties and
            said individual shall not be considered to be on leave, but, rather, a continued




                                              12
     employee of the Board. The UnionAssociation shall reimburse the Board for
     incurred costs.

5.   UnionAssociation Leave. One (1) employee designated by the Union Association
     shall, upon request, be granted a leave of absence without pay for up to two (2)
     years for the purpose of engaging in activities of the UnionAssociation or its
     affiliates. Upon return from such leave, the employee shall be assigned to the
     same or similar position.

     The UnionAssociation may, at its discretion, request leave for teachers to promote
     UnionAssociation business. Such requests must be made at least seven (7)
     working days in advance of the leave, except in extenuating circumstances. The
     Superintendent or designee shall have the discretion whether to grant the request.
     The UnionAssociation agrees to reimburse the Board the full daily rate of pay for
     those teachers.

6.   Sabbatical/ Professional Leave. Full-time regular employees who have completed
     three (3) years of continuous service may be granted, upon request, unpaid leave
     for educational purposes. The duration of the leave may not exceed one (1) year.
     Requests for such leaves shall clearly identify the program of study to be
     completed and why the leave will benefit the Board. For purposes of this leave, an
     employee must be enrolled in not less than nine (9) credit hours per semester or
     eighteen (18) credit hours per year in a planned program of studies. The
     employee shall, during the course of such leave, provide documentation to the
     Board of full-time attendance in a formalized course of studies, justifying the
     leave. Upon return, the employee shall be reassigned to a similar position
     contingent upon availability of vacancies at the time of return.

7.   Pre- and Post- School Leave. Professional leave with pay for employees shall be
     granted during pre- and post-school periods for attendance at summer sessions at
     colleges and universities. Reasonable travel time shall also be allowed if such
     leaves do not interfere with the applicant’s teaching duty. No leave of absence
     shall be granted for both pre- and post-school periods during the same summer,
     except leave may be granted where applicants may need to attend two (2)
     sessions of school to complete work for a degree. Professional leave for pre-
     school will not be granted teachers new to Pinellas County. Such leave is limited
     to a maximum of ten (10) days. Employees will be expected to furnish the Human
     Resources Personnel Department with evidence that the leave was used for the
     stated purpose.

8.   Political Leave. A teacher has the right to become a candidate for public office and
     to serve in such elective office unless there is a specific legal prohibition. Upon
     request, regularly appointed teachers shall be granted a leave of absence without
     pay in order to serve in public office. Upon return from such leave, a teacher shall
     be given full increment on the salary schedule and shall be assigned the same or
     similar position. Full-time elected officials shall be given a maximum of one (1)
     year's credit on the salary schedule.




                                     13
C.   Miscellaneous Provisions Relating to Leave

     1.      Employees who are granted a long term leave of absence shall not be permitted
             to receive full-time compensation from any other employer during the period
             authorized. To do so will release the Board from any further contractual
             obligations.

     2.      Employees on a leave of absence will not have any greater contractual rights (e.g.
             evaluation, contract renewal) than employees who are not on a leave of absence.

     3.      Any employee who is willfully absent from duty without leave shall forfeit
             compensation for the time of such absence, and his or her employment shall be
             subject to termination by the district school board.

     4.      Temporary Duty Elsewhere is not considered leave. Rather, the employee is
             rendering services in the performance of his/her assigned duties and at the
             direction of his/her supervisor in a place other than his/her usually assigned work
             location. Employees on temporary duty shall receive their regular pay and may be
             allowed expenses as provided by the Board.

     5.     Legal Processes Leave. Temporary Duty Elsewhere shall be granted to
            employees who are called for jury duty or are subpoenaed as a witness in a legal
            proceeding in accordance with School Board policy. TDE is not available for
            employees who are plaintiffs or defendants in court actions.

     6.     Use of Sick Leave by Family Members. Under the following guidelines district
            employees may authorize their spouse, child, parent or sibling who is also a
            district employee, to use sick leave that has accrued to the authorizing employee.


            a.      The recipient must have used all of his/her personal accumulation of sick
                    leave (and vacation leave, if applicable).

            b.      Maximum transfer for any one (1) illness, injury or complications arising
                    thereof, shall be thirty days (30) per school year.

            c.      Days used may not result in double compensation when combined with
                    other benefits such as workers compensation or tort damage awards.

            d.      The recipient and the donor must complete the appropriate form from the
                    human resources office.

            e.      The human resources administrator approving the form may require
                    documentation of the recipient's relationship to the authorizing employee.

D.   The parties agree to maintain a sick leave bank into which teachers may place days and
     withdraw same in the event of catastrophic illness or for bereavement leave for up to three
     (3) days for any person covered by Section A. 1 a above. . Guidelines are established and
     modified only by the parties.




                                             14
                       ARTICLE 9 UNIONASSOCIATION RIGHTS

A.     Faculty members may hold Union Association meetings, on prior notification to the principal,
       which are closed to non-members, providing that such meetings shall not interfere with the
       normal student day. Meetings may not interfere with regularly assigned duties. When such
       meetings have been scheduled, conflicting meetings shall not be scheduled.

B.     The use of designated areas for such meetings shall be approved by the principal in
       advance. All requests for building use shall conform to Board rules and regulations
       provided, however, that there shall be no cost to the UnionAssociation for such meetings
       so long as no overtime- custodial cost is involved.

C.     A copy of the official Board agenda and folder material shall be provided to the Association
       prior to each regular Board meeting. Copies of the official minutes of each regular Board
       meeting will be provided to the Association upon approval of the minutes of the Board.
       Table space, where available, will be provided at all Board meetings for two (2) Association
       representatives.

D.C.   Upon prior notification, the officers and staff of the UnionAssociation or their designees shall
       be free to visit in any work location provided that they do not interfere with actual student
       instruction.

E.D.   The UnionAssociation shall be provided ample bulletin board space in each work location
       for the posting of UnionAssociation information, notices and material. To the extent
       provided by law, the UnionAssociation shall have the right to use the in-school mail system
       (pony) and school mailboxes. The Union President or building representative shall have
       the right to use the district’s e-mail system for the limited purpose of announcing the date
       and time of union meetings.

F.E.   UnionAssociation members in each building shall have the exclusive right to elect their
       Faculty Representatives according to the Constitution and Bylaws of the UnionAssociation.
       Where there is no Faculty Representative, the UnionAssociation President shall either
       appoint one or shall act as Representative for that faculty until such time as an official
       representative is elected. Announcements of UnionAssociation building meetings may be
       made by the Faculty Representative over the school communication system outside the
       student day. before the arrival or after the dismissal of the students. Announcement of time,
       place, and date of meetings may be made during regularly scheduled announcements. The
       Faculty Representative shall act as the official representative of the UnionAssociation in
       the building. Principals and Faculty Representatives shall meet regularly and maintain
       regular communication in the schools on professional matters.

G.F.   The above privileges are for the exclusive use of the UnionAssociation and may not be
       granted to any other employee organization which represents or purports to represent
       members of the bargaining unit.




                                                 15
16
                            ARTICLE 10 CLASS SANCTITY

A.   Except for an emergency, a teacher will not be disturbed in class, whether by visitors or
     communications, unless advance notification is given the teacher. The administration shall
     cooperate with teachers in screening visitors wishing to visit classrooms within their
     building. Administrative supervisory personnel may visit the classroom for professional
     purposes provided such visits are not so frequent as to disturb the learning environment.

B.   Except for emergencies, all intercom announcements shall be made during homerooms or
     a specially designated period and at such other times as will not interrupt classroom
     instruction. Scheduled events (e.g., school pictures, hearing tests, etc.) are not considered
     emergencies. Emergency circumstances dictate immediate action.

C.   Individual announcements shall be placed in teachers' mailboxes or presented before the
      instructional period begins. If an announcement affects more than one (1) person, the
      announcement should be given in writing to those concerned instead of orally passing this
      information.

D.   Students should not be called from class except in an emergency or as scheduled for certain
     school activities as approved by the principal. These special interruptions of class
     instruction should be scheduled and kept to a minimum.

E.   Faculty checklists, material lists, message deliveries, and routine announcements should
     be limited to the school bulletin, to homeroom periods, to faculty meetings, to bulletin
     boards, or outside the instructional day.



              ARTICLE 11 ACADEMIC AND PERSONAL FREEDOM

A.   The value of individuality, the right of dissent, majority rule and minority rights are all
     inherent in a democratic society and should be fostered by professional educators.

B.   Both parties agree that no legitimate issue of controversy in our society should be excluded
     from the classroom. However, all sides of controversial issues must be presented.

C.   No employee shall on the basis of race, color, creed or religion, sex, legal marital status,
     national origin, age, disability, sexual orientation or any other basis prohibited by law be
     excluded from participation, be denied the benefits of or be subjected to
     discrimination/harassment under any educational program, activity, service or in any
     employment conditions, policies or practices conducted by the Pinellas County School
     Board.




                                              17
                 ARTICLE 12 TEACHER ASSAULT PROTECTION

A.   Teachers will immediately report to the school principal in writing all cases of assault/battery
     suffered by them in connection with their employment.

B.   This report will be forwarded to the Superintendent who will apprise the principal who shall
     notify the teacher as situations develop if said situations affect the teacher.

C.   If a pupil is found guilty of assaulting or battering a teacher and no teacher negligence is
      proven, any damages, injuries, or material loss suffered by the teacher shall be fairly
      compensated for by the Board. Claims for psychological damages as a result of such
      incidents shall not be compensable and are not covered by this provision.

D.   All disciplinary actions regarding assaults/batteries upon teachers shall be administered in
     compliance with the adopted code of student conduct. Pending disciplinary action, a
     teacher may follow the procedures under s. 1003.32 F.S., and school board policy for
     removal of the student from the class. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, if a pupil found
     guilty of assaulting or battering a teacher, said student will be expelled.

E.   If a teacher is sued in tort for accidents which occurred while the teacher was on active duty
      supervising students, the Board will provide for legal counsel for the teacher.


                         ARTICLE 13 STUDENT DISCIPLINE

A.   Disciplinary control of students' conduct in the classroom is the teacher's responsibility.
     Upon referral by the teacher, extreme behavioral problems are the principal's responsibility
     for appropriate disciplinary actions.

B.   In cases of persistent disciplinary problems, corrective action shall include counseling and
      interviews with both the student and parents. Where any teacher has found it necessary to
      send a student to the office, such student shall not immediately be returned to the
      classroom but shall instead be excluded from the classroom for a reasonable length of time
      consistent with the school’s behavior plan (SWBP). In cases where a teacher determines
      a student behavior interferes with the teacher’s ability to communicate effectively with the
      students in the class or with the ability of the student’s classmates to learn, the teacher
      may remove the student from class consistent with School Board policy and the provisions
      of Section 1003.32, Florida Statutes.

C.   After reasonable attempts have been made to modify pupil behavior by the teacher and
     specialists and whenever it appears to the classroom teacher and/or counselor, and in
     conjunction with the principal, that a pupil or pupils require the attention of special
     counselors, social workers, law enforcement personnel, physicians, or other professional
     persons, reasonable steps shall be taken to relieve the teacher of responsibilities with
     respect to such pupil.




                                               18
D.   Removal of disruptive students shall be consistent with the District Code of Student
     Conduct.

E.   Consistent with Florida law, discipline is the responsibility of all personnel in the school.

F.   A teacher may use such reasonable physical restraint as is necessary to protect the teacher
     from disruptive pupils, to protect other pupils from disruptive pupils, and to maintain general
     control and to keep good order in the classroom and in other places where the teacher is
     assigned to be in charge of pupils. No teacher shall be required to inflict corporal
     punishment.

G.   The parties agree to the ongoing codification and enforcement of standards of student
     conduct.



                  ARTICLE 14 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT

A.   Provisions for all professional learning activities shall be consistent with guidelines and
     procedures established by the Professional Development Department and its Advisory
     Committee.

B.   School-based professional development activities shall be developed based upon the
     school improvement plan and the evaluation cooperatively between the faculty and the
     administration and shall be evaluated on a regular basis.

C.   The Association shall be actively involved in the selection of teacher appointees to
     committees that directly impact the professional learning of teachers.

D.   The parties affirm that professional development activities should be focused on improving
     practice and be relevant to the delivery of instruction. Therefore, educators shall be
     provided professional learning aligned with the evaluation results and their iIndividual
     pProfessional dDevelopment pPlan. (IPDP).

     Training may also be required under the following conditions:

     1.      Where the administration or the teacher evaluation has identified a deficiency that
             would require training for remediation.

     2.      Where the training is required to effectively implement curriculum or instructional
             strategies as determined by the Advisory Committee.

     3.      Where the training is mandated by district, state or federal program requirements,
             or the school improvement plan.

E.   The parties agree to continue the practice of Trade Days being used on non-student
     contact days as recognition for completion of professional development and staff training.




                                               19
      A maximum of two (2) days may be earned and traded over the course of the year. The
      guidelines will be established jointly by the parties annually.
                                                                                                      Formatted: Font color: Auto

     ARTICLE 15 CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTIONAL IMPROVEMENT


Section A. INVOLVEMENT

A.   The Board and the Union Association agree that teachers shall participate regularly in
     curriculum development, individually and in committee.

B.   The Board agrees to Union Association involvement in curriculum.

C.   All programs shall be evaluated periodically by the administration and teachers and
     discussed with the Board. The Board agrees that it shall seek opinions of teachers using
     these programs before the continuance of said programs.

Section B. INNOVATION

1.   The Board and the Association agree that innovative programs may be relevant to the
     learning process and that adequate financing is a prerequisite to the development of such
     programs.

2.   The parties also agree that innovative programs shall be thoroughly investigated as to
     their potential for the improvement of instruction before district funds are committed and
     programs implemented.

3.   Faculties that desire to investigate innovative programs should be allowed to volunteer
     their efforts. Teachers who wish to participate in pilot programs should contact their
     principal.

4.   Should a school adopt an innovative program, teachers who desire to keep their former
     status in the same school may so request or shall be allowed to transfer.

5.   The parties will investigate alternative ways to deliver training (e.g. distance learning).

Section C. DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION

1.   The Board and the Association agree that the professional staff is and should continue to
     be a major source of development and innovations in improving the educational programs
     carried on in the schools. The parties agree further that it is important for the professional
     staff to participate in the overall coordination of studies, projects, and other activities
     directed toward the development, improvement, and implementation of such programs,
     toward the evaluation of existing programs, toward the devising, testing and introduction
     of new programs, and toward research in pertinent and educationally related areas. The
     parties recognize that there are other institutional and community resources capable of




                                               20
        great contributions toward these ends and that the utilization of such resources should be
        coordinated with the efforts of the school administration and professional staff.

2.     Any major innovative program/experiment shall be in effect for a reasonable period of time
       before being expanded to other schools. During the experimental period, teachers who
       might be affected at some future date shall observe the program.

3.    Prior to the application of new programs, a document shall be developed which will detail
      the responsibilities of the staff and the administration. The document will include, but will
      not necessarily be limited to, the following: staffing, supporting assistance, materials, and
      evaluation.

Section D.

D.     4.       The Board and the Union Association agree that all members of the professional         Formatted: Indent: Left: 0", Hanging: 0.5", Outline
       staff are partners in the educational process. The parties shall encourage schools to           numbered + Level: 1 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
       develop programs that provide means to meet the district's goals and objectives through a       Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 0" + Indent
                                                                                                       at: 0", Tab stops: 0.5", Left
       site-based decision-making model. The Board and the Union Association agree to provide
       resources necessary to help schools who wish to participate in this process.

Section E.

The parties agree that individual faculties shall be given greater flexibility to develop innovative
programs to meet the common goals of the Association and the Board. The parties agree that
local school professional staffs will be empowered to identify ways of improving the educational
process and to determine waivers to this agreement necessary to implement those
improvements. Any waivers must be approved by the school administration, a vote of two-thirds
of the faculty, and be endorsed by the parties. Only instructional personnel who will be at the
school when the waiver is implemented are eligible to vote. An eligible voter, at a minimum, must
work at the school fifty (50) percent of the school day. No revote on the same waiver or variation
of that waiver is permitted within a ten-month period from the original vote and must be for the
next school year. All such proposals shall be submitted in writing to the parties for consideration.
A secret-ballot election will be held by the Principal’s Designee and the Lead PCTA Faculty
Representative or a representative from the Association. Access to the grievance process is not
affected by participation in a site-based school restructuring project. When specific contract
waivers are determined pursuant to this article, individual faculty members would not have access
to the grievance procedure on matters related to the waivers.
                         ARTICLE 16 PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITY

A.     Both parties agree that an effective school system requires mutual understanding and
       cooperation. Accordingly, the parties agree that they will mutually develop and implement
       programs and activities for the improvement of instruction. The parties agree that teachers
       will serve on committees and in such other capacities to further the common goals of the
       parties.

B.     The parties agree that special circumstances occasionally dictate that teachers will provide




                                                21
       additional time for students made necessary by factors beyond the control of the teacher.
       Under such circumstances such time will be determined cooperatively by the teacher and
       the principal provided that the time expended will not unduly interfere with normal
       preparation for related class work.

C.     Each teacher is to be treated in a professional manner at all times.

D.     Teachers are to treat other employees of the system in a professional manner at all times.


                              ARTICLE 17 VOLUNTARY TRANSFER

Section A. DEFINITION

A voluntary transfer is a teacher request for a change in teaching position from one school to
another.

Section B. PROCEDURES

1.     The voluntary transfer process shall be consistent with the intent to Transfer application
       form and the corresponding timeline.

2.1.   Annually, the details of the voluntary transfer this process, including : specific guidelines
       and timeline are developed through collaborative bargaining.

3.2.   Transfers may be considered outside the negotiated guidelines for promotional
       opportunities, to accept a higher paying position, or if in the best interest of the District. If a
       qualified replacement is required, one must be obtained before a transfer can become
       effectuated.

4.3.   The voluntary transfer process may be suspended by mutual consent of the parties in order
       to address reduction in force issues or other changes in the financial status of the district.

5.4.   The Board reserves the right to adjust the composition of the staff when it becomes
       necessary to comply with legislative requirements and this shall take precedence over the
       negotiated process of teacher transfer and placement.

6.5.   In the event of opening a new school or school consolidation, the Board may establish
       reasonable limits on transfers approved from any school.

7.6.   It is understood that all transfers shall be made in the best interests of the teacher and the
       district. It is understood that each position shall be filled by the best-qualified applicant. A
       minimum of 50% of the applicants chosen for interview must be the most senior applicants.
       When, in the opinion of the hiring administratorPersonnel Department, the best-qualified
       applicant is not one of the more senior applicants interviewed, the reason for the decision
       will be provided to the more senior applicants, when requested. sufficient cause shall be             Formatted: Not Highlight
       given.




                                                  22
8.7.    Positions which are filled at the conclusion of the school year by long-term substitutes,
        temporary or remainder of year probationary contracts in non-protected assignments shall
        be vacated for use in the voluntary and involuntary transfer process. If such positions are
        not filled by transfer, the Board shall select the best-qualified applicant from outside the
        system.

9.8.    A teacher who has not been recommended for reappointment for the following year, who is
        listed as out-of-field, who is not Highly Qualified, who is on a DROP extension, or who is
        on a temporary contract, is not eligible for a transfer. A teacher who is listed as out of field
        is also not eligible to transfer unless the transfer would result in him/her moving into a
        position for which he/she is in-field. A teachers who is in the process of completing their
        ESOL or reading endorsement is eligible to transfer provided that they have completed their
        annual requirements as of the first date of the transfer period.

10.9.   The District will make a reasonable effort to ensure that all vacancies are identified and
        posted for the transfer process.

11.10. The timeline for allocation of units will determine the beginning date for the voluntary
       transfer cycle. Whenever possible a voluntary transfer cycle will take place prior to the
       completion of the school year.
12.    Schools designated as “priority” schools by the district shall have priority consideration in
       placing voluntary transfers at their school.


                            ARTICLE 18 INVOLUNTARY TRANSFERS

Section A. DEFINITION
An involuntary transfer is a transfer from one school to another that is initiated by the Administration.

Section B. PROCEDURES
1.    Involuntary transfers will be made in the best interests of the school system and/or when it
       becomes necessary to comply with legislative requirements.

2.      Under no circumstances shall a teacher be involuntarily transferred for discriminatory or
        capricious reasons.

3.      The convenience, wishes, and years of service of the individual teacher shall be considered
        to the extent that these considerations do not conflict with the instructional requirements
        and best interest of the school system and the students.

4.      A teacher in a regular program shall not be transferred into a federal or state program
        without the teacher's consent. Such teacher retains all contractual rights and seniority.

5.      The Board and the Union Association shall establish guidelines for the process of
        involuntary transfers which shall recognize the seniority of teachers and which shall provide
        for:




                                                   23
         a.     The identification and protection of essential ongoing supplementary
                responsibilities; and

         b.     The protection of critical curricular responsibilities.

6.      Racial composition of the staff shall take precedence over seniority in the involuntary
        transfer process.

7.      An involuntarily transferred teacher shall be recalled to the school from which the teacher
        was transferred up to the 20th student day August 1 following of the next school year if a         Formatted: Superscript
        position is available for which said teacher is certified. and highly qualified. Under no
        circumstances shall transfers be effectuated during the school year unless it can be shown
        that such transfers can be made without disrupting the educational process.


                                      ARTICLE 19 SENIORITY                                                 Formatted: Not Highlight

Seniority shall accrue on the basis of one (1) year for each year of continuous service in the district.
Leaves shall not constitute an interruption of service but shall not be counted as a year of service.
In the event of equal seniority, the date of official notification shall be the date. In the event of
simultaneous notification, disputes shall be resolved by lot. Interruptions of service less than thirty
(30) calendar days shall not constitute a break in service if the interruption was caused by a
temporary reduction in force or delays in receipt of test scores for the Florida Teacher Certification
Exam (FTCE).                                                                                               Formatted: Not Highlight
                                                                                                           Formatted: Not Highlight
                                    ARTICLE 20 TERMINAL PAY                                                Formatted: Font: Bold
                                                                                                           Formatted: Font: Not Bold
A. Terminal pay shall be granted to an employee at retirement or to his/her beneficiary if service
   is terminated by death. "Retirement" shall mean eligibility for retirement benefits under the
   Florida Retirement System (FRS), at normal retirement or disability retirement as provided by
   law. Evidence of service retirement shall be determined by a signed copy of the "Application
   for Service Retirement." Evidence of disability retirement shall be determined by a statement
   of disability from the retirement office. Payment for such terminal pay benefits shall be as
   follows:

     1. Retirement: Subsequent to six (6) years of service in Pinellas County School System, the
        employee shall receive payment for unused accrued sick leave under the following formula:

              Subsequent to six (6) years                        40%
              Subsequent to ten (10) years                       65%
              Subsequent to fifteen (15) years                   70%
              Subsequent to twenty (20) years                    80%
              Subsequent to twenty-five (25) years               90%
              Subsequent to thirty (30) years                    100%

     2. Termination by death: The employee's beneficiary shall receive payment based upon the
        following formula:




                                                   24
       a.   During the first three (3) years of service, the daily rate of pay shall be multiplied by
            thirty-five percent (35%) times the number of accumulated sick leave days.

       b.   During the next three (3) years of service, the daily rate of pay shall be multiplied by
            forty percent (40%) times the number of accumulated sick leave days.

       c.   During the next three (3) years of service, the daily rate of pay shall be multiplied by
            forty-five percent (45%) times the number of accumulated sick leave days.

       d.   During and after the tenth year of service, the daily rate of pay shall be multiplied by
            fifty percent (50%) times the number of accumulated sick leave days.

       e.   Subsequent to thirteen (13) years of service, the daily rate of pay shall be computed
            using the percentages applicable if the employee had retired.

B.     Terminal pay benefits shall be payable within three (3) weeks of the last work day of
       employment indicated in the official Board agenda book authorizing the employee's
       termination. Earlier payment may be authorized by mutual consent of the parties.                 Formatted: Font color: Auto

B.C.   The Board agrees to review the possibility of paying out terminal pay upon separation
       consistent with state law and board policy. The Board will conduct a study which may
       include engaging an actuary to determine the financial impact of such decision. A
       recommendation will be made following the Board’s consideration of the study.


                            ARTICLE 21 TEACHER ASSIGNMENTS

A.     Teachers shall be given a reasonable opportunity to participate in the formulation of the
       master schedule for their schools, particularly that part of the master schedule that
       pertains to them and their schedule or class assignment. Each member of the
       instructional staff shall indicate their top three preferences for assignments for the
       following year. The schedule for the following year shall be formulated as soon as
       possible and shall not be altered except in the case of circumstances that did not exist or
       were not apparent at the time the schedule was created. Each principal shall submit said
       schedule to administration and copies shall be made available to the UnionAssociation.
       Each member of the instructional staff shall have access to the tentative master schedule
       prior to the end of the post-school period.

B.     If conditions arise which necessitate changes, teachers affected shall be notified as soon
        as possible. Present members of the teacher staff who have applied in writing and are
        qualified shall be given first consideration in any such reassignments. Principals who are
        aware of significant staff changes shall notify affected teachers prior to the close of the
        transfer period if possible. When such circumstances requiring change(s) to the master
        schedule occur or become apparent after the close of the school year, principals shall
        make reasonable attempts to contact department chairs/team leaders and those teachers
        impacted by the change(s) to solicit their input in adjusting the schedule to accommodate
        those changes in the best interest of the students.




                                                25
C.     Except in limited circumstances, teachers shall be assigned to teach only in the grades
       and subject fields for which they are qualified, as well as in accordance with the
       regulations of the State Board of Education. If a teacher is requested to teach in any
       grade or subject area for which they are not certified, they will be informed of the
       requirements of the new assignment in writing and will have the opportunity to reject the
       new assignment.

D.     A teacher with appropriate qualifications will be given an opportunity to work with classes     Formatted: Indent: Left: 0", Hanging: 0.51",
       of varying grades and achievement levels. Assignments shall be established so that staff        Widow/Orphan control
       members have equivalent opportunities to teach subjects for which they are qualified. [not
       new, moved from article 39]                                                                     Formatted: Font: Not Bold, Font color: Auto

D.E.   Secondary class teaching assignments shall not include classes requiring more than              Formatted: Font: 11 pt
       two (2) separate academic preparations or distinctly different lesson plans per day             Formatted: List Paragraph, Justified, Tab stops: 1", Left
       unless the teacher voluntarily accepts an additional preparation. [not new—moved                + 1.5", Left + 2", Left + 2.5", Left + 3", Left + 3.5",
       from article 39]                                                                                Left + 4", Left + 4.5", Left + 5", Left + 5.5", Left + 6",
                                                                                                       Left
E.F.   The Board recognizes the value of a counseling program within the total school program.         Formatted: Font: 11 pt
       The Board agrees that it will establish policies jointly with the counselors that provide an
                                                                                                       Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial, 11 pt
       opportunity for the full utilization of counseling resources.
                                                                                                       Formatted: Font: 11 pt
F.G.   The Board and the Union Association agree that physical education specialists are a
       necessity in the total elementary school program. A physical education specialist is a
       requirement in order to develop skills and positive growth at the elementary school level.
       Physical education specialists shall be provided within the existing physical education
       program.

G.     In rare instances, and when approved by the Association, teachers may be assigned to an
        alternative schedule which might involve evening, weekend, or summer employment. In
        such incidences where it relates to reduction in force, the benefits to the employee shall
        be proportional to those enjoyed by employees who work in the day program. Persons
        assigned to alternative schedules will be afforded the applicable rights of transfer.
        Specific provision which will relate to affected teachers will be determined jointly by the
        parties and given to affected teachers prior to their being reassigned.

H.     Change in assignments shall not be made for disciplinary or punitive reasons.

I.     The Union Association shall be consulted with respect to any change in district
       certification requirements which may adversely affect employee status. Any teacher
       adversely affected by such change shall have the opportunity to transfer to a grade or
       subject area for which they are certified.

                              ARTICLE 22 REDUCTION IN FORCE

A.     Should economic circumstances dictate a reduction in personnel, the Board shall take
       whatever steps are necessary to assign personnel to appropriate positions within the district
       for which they are qualified, consistent with this Agreement and law.




                                                26
B.   Should the Board be unable to maintain all employees, it shall immediately meet with the
     Union Association to provide for an orderly method of reducing, retraining, and recalling
     affected employees.

                                  ARTICLE 23 VACANCIES

A.   The Superintendent or the Superintendent's designee shall email a vacancy notice and ,
     post notice on the District’s hiring platform Intranet, and post notice in each school inviting
     qualified persons to apply for administrative or supervisory vacancies which may become
     available. The following positions will be announced: district administration staff, principal,
     director, and assistant principal.

B.   The notice will be accompanied by a general description of duties, list of qualifications, a
     salary schedule and the deadline for filing applications.

C.   Upon receipt, notices of vacancies shall be posted immediately and remain posted for at
     least five (5) days.

D.   Application will be made through the Human Resources Office.

E.   No individual will be contacted in regard to a specific position until such time as the vacancy
     has been posted in compliance with Section A of this Article. An appointment to positions
     other than teaching, length of service in the county school system, as well as academic
     qualifications and successful performance, shall be included in the criteria for selection.
     However, none of the above provisions shall be implied to supersede the Superintendent's
     authority as established in Florida Statutes.


                            ARTICLE 24 SUMMER PROGRAMS                                                 Formatted: Not Highlight

A.   Positions for summer programs teaching shall be filled in compliance with the established
     procedures for application and selection developed by the Human Resources Division
     and the Association. Teachers who apply shall be notified of their selection by the
     appropriate level of administration.

B.   In filling such positions, quality of performance, attendance record, experience, teaching
      background in the specific content area, and seniority in the county school system shall
      be the criteria for selection.

C.   Employment practices for summer program shall be fairly applied. Upon request, a
     teacher denied a summer program position shall be given good and sufficient reason.

D.   Summer employees shall be accorded all applicable rights of regularly employed
     teachers.                                                                                         Formatted: Font color: Auto, Not Highlight
     [moved to article 48]
                                                                                                       Formatted: Font color: Auto, Not Highlight
                                                                                                       Formatted: Indent: Left: 1.5", First line: 0.5"




                                               27
                             ARTICLE 245 EVENING PROGRAMS                                              Formatted: Not Highlight
                                                                                                       Formatted: Not Highlight

A.   Teachers who wish to apply for positions shall make written application at any time using         Formatted: Indent: Left: 1.5", First line: 0.5"
     the process adopted by Human Resources for the position.                                          Formatted: Not Highlight
                                                                                                       Formatted: Not Highlight
B.   Teachers applying for such positions shall apply through and be notified of the action
     taken on their application as early as is practicable by the Human Resources Office.

C.   Positions in these programs will be offered first to Pinellas county teachers who are
     qualified for the position.

D.   In filling such positions, quality of performance, past experience, attendance records, the
      minor and major fields of study, shall be criteria for selection.

E.   Teachers who teach full-time in the regular day program shall not teach more than six (6)
     hours per week in the evening program except when working as an evening program
     administrator. Teachers will be allowed exception to this limit provided it is in the best
     interest of the system and does not violate the intent of this provision.

F.   The evening program shall be advertised and applications from qualified personnel shall           Formatted: Left, Indent: Left: 0", Hanging: 0.51",
     be solicited consistent with Human Resources procedures.                                          Space After: 21 pt, Line spacing: Exactly 12.95 pt,
                                                                                                       Outline numbered + Level: 1 + Numbering Style: A, B,
                                                                                                       C, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 0" +
                                ARTICLE 25 LESSON PLANS                                                Indent at: 0", Widow/Orphan control, Tab stops: 0.48",


A.   Teachers shall plan for instruction and maintain lesson plans either in a written or
     electronic format for the purpose of preparing daily lessons for each course they teach.
     No particular format is required for lesson plans. However, they must be Lesson plans
     shall be “standards based” and aligned to available District curriculum resources. Nothing
     herein is intended to preclude the use of supplemental materials. Lesson plans and shall
     be followed with sufficient flexibility to allow for varying conditions, events, interruptions,
     and the varied needs of the students.

B.   Lesson plans shall be readily available for review by the administration and for the use of       Formatted: Indent: Left: 0", Hanging: 0.5"
     each potential substitute teacher who may be called upon to conduct the regular teacher’s
     classes. Administrators may require up to one week of lesson plans at a time to be
     submitted in advance of a lesson only under the following circumstances:

     1. The teacher has taught in the district for one year or less, or                                Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", Hanging: 0.25"

     2. The teacher is on a success plan, or

     3. The teacher was rated as beginning or lower on their most recent observation or
        evaluation in the Standards Based Planning domain.At the discretion of the
        administrator, teachers may be required to submit their lesson plans to the
        administrator for review.

C.   The written lesson plan itself is not the basis for evaluating a teacher in the Standards-        Formatted: Indent: Left: 0", Hanging: 0.5"




                                               28
     Based Planning domain. The implementation of effective planning is the manner by which
     a teacher demonstrates Standards Based Planning with students.




                   ARTICLE 26 TEACHER FACILITIES AND MATERIALS

A.   Each teacher shall be provided space (e.g., closets, file cabinets, storage container, desk)
     in which they may safely store instructional materials and supplies. Secure storage space
     shall be provided for traveling teachers.

B.   A separate dining space shall be provided for the use of the teachers at each building in
     which lunchroom facilities are provided for students. If this is not practicable within existing
     facilities, an adequate number of separate tables shall be reserved for use of teachers. In
     all new construction, a separate dining room shall be provided.

C.   A teacher's work area shall be provided. Adequate equipment and supplies to aid in the
     preparation of instructional materials will be available.

D.   Where possible, an appropriately furnished room for use as a teacher's lounge shall be
     provided. Said room is to be in addition to the above-mentioned workroom. In all new
     construction, a separate workroom and lounge shall be provided.

E.   An adequate portion of the parking lot at each school building where parking lots exist will
     be reserved for teacher parking at no charge.

F.   A space shall be provided for all school personnel where confidential conversations may be
     held. Teachers shall be allowed the use of a school phone that will provide for confidential
     phone conversations. Use of phone shall be limited to school business, Union Association
     business, and personal business of an emergency nature.

G.   In all new construction, an adequate number of separate restrooms reserved for the use of
      male and female teachers shall be provided. In existing facilities, where feasible, separate
      restrooms shall be provided for the faculty. Adequate facilities shall be defined as facilities,
      which conform to health department and industrial standards. Where possible, in large
      schools, restroom facilities shall be conveniently located throughout the school plant.
      Restroom facilities should be contiguous to planning and/or workroom areas.

H.   Adequate materials, including computers and equivalent access to technology, required in
     daily teaching responsibility shall be provided.

I.   A copy of both the teacher’s textbook manual and the electronic version of that manual used
     in each course subject taught shall be provided.

J.   A dictionary shall be provided in every classroom.




                                                29
K.J.     The Board and the Union Association agree that adequate instruction requires adequate
         equipment, material and facilities. In the event that this cannot be accomplished, the course
         or subject so affected should not be offered. Teachers shall be involved in decisions as to
         the adequacy of the above-cited items.

L.K.     The Board and the Union Association agree that educational opportunity shall be as
         equivalent as possible throughout the school system given the special nature of particular
         programs and activities. The Board agrees to work to provide those conditions necessary
         to assure equivalency within facilities, teaching supplies, class size, equipment, supporting
         personnel, and preparation time.

M.L.     The Board and the Union Association agree that a functioning two-way communication
         system is essential in areas where the safety and health of teachers and students may be
         affected.

N.M.     The Board recognizes the inconveniences created by not having adequate facilities during
         the instructional day. To that end, the Board will review the issue of inadequate facilities
         and address this concern in future budget considerations.


       ARTICLE 27 TIME; RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES DURING AND AFTER THE                                 Formatted: Indent: Left: 0", First line: 0", Space After:
                         SCHOOL DAYSCHOOL SCHEDULES                                                      0 pt

It is the philosophy of this agreement that a teacher's primary responsibility is to teach. The
parties to this agreement recognize that there are certain other activities which must be
performed during the school day that are essential to the safe and effective operation of the
school and that professional development is essential to continuous quality improvement
necessary to improve student achievement. This provision is intended to establish the
parameters for the school day including the teacher’s contractual day, the student instructional
day, and the rights and responsibilities of teachers within this time frame. Notwithstanding this
Article, school schedules may be modified by Memorandum of Understanding or state
mandate in order to provide additional support to schools that may need it.

1.       Hours of Work.

A.      Unless otherwise agreed to by the parties, tThe regular school day for teachers is seven         Formatted: No bullets or numbering, Tab stops: 0.5",
(7) hours and thirty (30) minutes. The regular school day on days when students are not in               Left + Not at 0.99"
attendance, such as in-service, preschool, post-school, and staff development days, is seven
(7) hours. (8:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.). These hours constitute the “Teacher Contractual Day”. In
keeping with the intent of school improvement, local school staffs are encouraged to use the
provisions of Article 15 to fashion the most beneficial schedule of activities for that particular
school. They may elect to waive any or all of the provisions of this section of the Agreement
and convert their schools to a thirty-seven and one-half (37.5) hour work week in lieu of a
seven and one-half (7.5) hour/day schedule. Such decisions must be part of the School
Improvement Plan, approved by the school administration and a two- thirds vote of the faculty.
Only instructional personnel who will be at the school when the waiver is implemented are
eligible to vote. An eligible voter, at a minimum, must work at the school fifty (50) percent of




                                                  30
the school day. No revote on the same waiver or variation of that waiver is permitted within a
ten-month period from the original vote and must be for the next school year. All such proposals
shall be submitted in writing to the parties for consideration. A secret-ballot election will be held
by the Principal’s Designee and the Lead PCTA Faculty Representative or a representative
from the Association.

B.2.    Lunch.                                                                                          Formatted: Indent: Left: 0", First line: 0", Outline
                                                                                                        numbered + Level: 1 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
The daily schedule on regular school days shall provide for a minimum of thirty (30) minutes            Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 0" + Indent
                                                                                                        at: 0", Tab stops: Not at 0.99"
for lunch time. One hour for lunch will be provided on days when students are not in
attendance as described above. Lunch times are to be free from assigned duties or
supervising students. Teachers can leave the school grounds during this period so long as
regular classes are not interfered with and the office is notified of their absence. It is
understood that certain emergency conditions may exist that would require an alteration to
the schedule. Any significant alteration limiting the time requirement will qualify the teacher
for compensatory time. Under no circumstances will teachers be required to limit lunch time
on a regular or continuing basis.

C.      The principal shall have authority to permit flexibility with regard to the Teacher
        Contractual Day wen circumstances warrant.[not deleted just moved]

D.      Except as provided in Section 2 B (12) herein, teachers are not required to be on duty
        longer than the Teacher Contractual Day without additional compensation or
        compensatory time off.[not deleted just moved]

2.      3.       Definitions: Time Needed for Planning, Training, Meetings, and other Duties.           Formatted: Indent: Left: 0", Hanging: 0.5", No bullets
                                                                                                        or numbering
A.              The parties recognize that there is limited time within the Teacher’s Contractual
                                                                                                        Formatted: No bullets or numbering
Day to accomplish the numerous activities required in the education profession. This section
is intended to define some of these activities: the numerous activities required to be performed
and to define the allotted time for accomplishing such activities. For this purpose, the following
definitions shall be used:

       a. Definitions:

       1.a.Student Instructional Day: This is the time that students are required to be present         Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.44", Numbered + Level: 1 +
           at school. The length of the student instructional day shall be designed to maximize         Numbering Style: a, b, c, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment:
           instructional time for students. for elementary students is 6 hours. The length of the       Left + Aligned at: 1" + Indent at: 1.25"
           student instructional day for secondary students is 6.5 hours. This time frame will
           vary for any school required, by state mandate, to extend the school day for
           additional instruction. [inserted language moved from article 39]. The Union
           reserves the right to bargain the impact of any changes to the length of the student
           instructional day.

             Non Student Contact Time: This is the difference between the Teacher Contractual
             Day and the Student Instructional Day. In elementary school this is 1.5 hours each
             day (7.5 hours a week) and in secondary this is one (1) hour of time each day (5




                                                 31
   hours a week).

2.b.Uninterrupted PlanningTime: This is time reserved for the teacher to use at their        Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.44", Numbered + Level: 1 +
    professional discretion for work related activities. work on their own to plan for       Numbering Style: a, b, c, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment:
    instruction and prepare for classes, contact parents, participate in teacher initiated   Left + Aligned at: 1" + Indent at: 1.25"
    Parent Conferences, evaluate student work, meet with students, grade
    assignments and related activities.

3.c. Structured Planning: This term means the standards based planning methods
     intended to improve the quality of instruction through professional development
     and support to teachers and may consist of “common planning,” “collaborative
     planning,” “lesson study,” “data chats,” “coaching,” professional learning
     communities,” and other planning methods defined in Rule 6A-1.099811 F.A.C.

Professional Learning Community: "Professional Learning Community” or “PLC” is an
   extended learning opportunity to foster collaborative learning among colleagues
   within a particular work environment or field. It is often used in schools as a way to
   organize educators into working groups focused on a targeted improvement issue.

Collaborative Planning: A research-based professional dialogue between two or more
    staff members working interdependently to develop and achieve common goals
    that are focused on the following: continuous improvement of student performance,
    professional practice, and/or the achievement of school improvement goals. It is
    grade level/content area specific and occurs on a consistent basis for teachers to
    utilize curriculum guides, resource guides, along with student data analysis that
    may include on-going progress monitoring, (formative assessments), district
    common assessments, and student work to make appropriate instructional
    adjustments. Teachers identify questions to be asked during instruction, barriers
    that may arise and the resources needed to support their instructional delivery.
    Optimally, the ESE, ELL, and other supporting personnel will be included. This can
    occur with or without a coach.

4. Lesson Study: “Lesson Study’’ is a form of long-term professional development in          Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.44", Hanging: 0.25", No
   which teams of teachers systematically and collaboratively conduct research               bullets or numbering, Tab stops: 1.48", Left
   closely tied to lessons, and then use what they learn about student thinking to
   become more effective instructors.

7. d) Coaching: “Coaching” means serving as anconfidential, non-evaluative
   instructional resource for teachers to model and help improve instruction. in a
   school to generate improvement in student achievement by improving the quality
   of instruction through professional development support to teachers in their
   respective content areas, as needed, based on an analysis of student performance
   and observational data.

8. Coaching Cycle: Coaching Cycles are intended to provide support to teachers to
   improve their practice whether in content knowledge, planning for instruction, or




                                        32
     delivery methods (pedagogy of teaching and learning). They are conducted on a
     one-on-one basis, and may vary depending upon the need and/or request of the
     teacher. A Coaching Cycle may include:

a) Coach meets with the teacher and, with the consent of the teacher, the
   administrator(s) to determine priorities based on performance
   data/deliberate practice needs.

b) Coach meets with teacher to analyze data and plan for their
   collaborative instructional time.

c) Coach models for teacher from the collaborative plan they had created (gradual
   release of responsibility).

d) Coach debriefs with teacher after each session and provides feedback to the
   teacher and, with the teacher’s consent, the administrator(s).

e) Coach and, with the teacher’s consent, the administrator(s) monitor for evidence of
   changed practice resulting from the coaching sessions.

f)   Repeat cycle if needed.

9. Administrative Directed Coaching Cycle: This cycle occurs based on specifically
   identified instructional deficiencies revealed through observation of the teacher’s
   performance. This coaching cycle may include:

a) Coach meets with the teacher and the administrator(s) to determine priorities
   based on performance data/deliberate practice needs.

b) Coach meets with teacher to analyze data and plan for their
   collaborative instructional time.

c) Coach models for teacher from the collaborative plan they had created (gradual
   release of responsibility).

d) Coach debriefs with teacher after each session and provides feedback to both the
   teacher and the administrator(s).

e) Coach and administrator(s) monitor for evidence of changed practice resulting
   from the coaching sessions.

f)   Repeat cycle if needed.

e) Non-Teaching Duties: These are duties which are supervisory or clerical in nature
    and do not fulfill primarily educational functions. These duties include, but are not
    limited to health services, supervision of study halls, corridors, playgrounds,




                                        33
            cafeterias, streets, sidewalks, and buses, collecting money from students,
            delivering books to classrooms, taking inventories, duplicating instructional and
            other materials, and other similar clerical functions.

      f) Staff/Faculty Meetings: These are meetings called by the principal for teachers to
          attend during the Teacher Contractual Day.

                10.    Parent Conferences: These are meeting between the teacher and
                       parents regarding the student. It is understood that the term is intended
                       to exclude 504 meetings and I.E.P meetings.

B.     4.       Daily Schedules by Agreement                                                       Formatted: Indent: Left: 0", Hanging: 0.51", No
                                                                                                   bullets or numbering
a) 1The parties agree that the daily schedules for teachers are best determined jointly by the
teachers and administration to accommodate the unique circumstances of each school and
the best interests of the students. Each school site will create a working subcommittee
comprised of the principal, or his/her designee, the faculty representative for PCTA and two
additional staff members (1 selected by the principal administration and , 1 selected by the
faculty representative) that will meet to develop a plan by the close of pre-school of each
year to establish a planning time schedule, and address the number and types of
“mandatory” meetings held at the school level. and a plan that reduces, where possible, the
number of mandatory meetings/training sessions during nonstudent contact time. The written
plan will be submitted to the instructional staff to be voted on by a secret ballot. It must be
approved by the majority of the instructional staff voting on the schedule. approved by the
faculty and signed by the principal and the faculty representative. A copy of each school’s
plan will be sent to the Area Superintendent and the PCTA office by the end of the first week
of school..October 15. The plan will include:

       a.       The names of the four committee members who worked on the plan.                    Formatted: Font: 11 pt, Font color: Auto

       a.b.     The school start and end times for the teacher and student day;

       b.       The schedule for teacher planning and lunch;

       c.       A calendar showing all mandatory meetings./training sessions and will provide
                for a minimum of two hours per week free of such requirements; and the
                amount and types of required paper work that might be streamlined or
                reduced through the consolidation and/or elimination of reports                    Formatted: Font: 11 pt, Font color: Auto

       d.       One day a month for a voluntary union meeting free of any conflicting
                meetings;                                                                          Formatted: Font: 11 pt, Font color: Auto

5.     Daily Schedule Where no Agreement.
Should the committee convened under paragraph 4 fail to develop a schedule, or should the
faculty fail to approve a schedule, the daily schedule will be developed in compliance with the
following provisions:                                                                              Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left: 0", Space After: 8.25
                                                                                                   pt, Line spacing: Exactly 11.7 pt, Tab stops: 0.5", Left +
                                                                                                   Not at 1.94"




                                                34
Schools unable to reach agreement shall be governed by the following provisions:
        Elementary
         a)   Except as described below, each elementary teacher shall have a minimum of
              thirty (30) minutes of Uninterrupted Planning Time daily during the Student
              Instructional Day and the equivalent of two (2) hours per week outside the
              Student Instructional Day.during Non- Student Contact Time. Planning time
              shall be distributed equitably to all bargaining unit employees at each school.
              .
         b)   Elementary school teachers may be required to participate in Structured            Formatted: Font: 11 pt
              Planning twice a week, once during the Student Instructional Day and once
                                                                                                 Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.63", Hanging: 0.38",
              outside the Student Instructional Day but within the teacher contract hours.
                                                                                                 Numbered + Level: 1 + Numbering Style: a, b, c, … +
                                                                                                 Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 1.5" + Indent
              Secondary and Post Secondary                                                       at: 1.75"

         c)   Except as described below,Eeach secondary and full-time post-secondary             Formatted: Font: 11 pt
              school teacher shall have one (1) full period or its equivalent of Uninterrupted   Formatted: Indent: Left: 0"
              Planning Time during the Student Instructional Day and two (2) hours per           Formatted: Indent: Left: 1"
              week outside the Student Instructional Day. during Non-Student Contact time.
                                                                                                 Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.69", Hanging: 0.31",
              Where the subject taught is organized in such blocks of time as to make this       Numbered + Level: 1 + Numbering Style: a, b, c, … +
              provision unworkable without seriously hampering the instructional program,        Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 1.5" + Indent
              teachers shall receive no less than 330 minutes of Uninterrupted Planning          at: 1.75"
              Time per week. In recognition that the activities defined in paragraphs 2 (A) 4
              through 7 above assist teachers in the improvement of instruction, teachers
              may participate in a Professional Learning Community, Collaborative
              Planning, Lesson Study or Coaching Cycle during their Uninterrupted
              Planning Time should they choose.In elementary schools only, the
              administration may schedule the activities defined in paragraphs 2 (A) 4, 5, 6
              and 8 during Uninterrupted Planning Time during the Student Day a maximum
              of one day per week. In such cases, an affected teacher cannot be required to
              attend other meetings on that day. The Administration in any school may
              schedule an additional mandatory meeting no more than one time per week
              outside the student day. This language is not intended to discourage teachers
              from collaborating with colleagues, participating in Collaborative Planning,
              Professional Learning Communities, Lesson Study or Coaching on an informal
              basis at any time.

         1.d) Secondary and Post- Secondary school teachers may be required to
              participate in Structured Planning outside the student day one time per week,
              subject to the administrator’s ability to substitute an additional Structured
              Planning session for a faculty/staff meeting as described in paragraph e
              below.

         Number of Mandatory Meetings                                                            Formatted: Default, Indent: Left: 0.69", Hanging:
                                                                                                 0.31", Space After: 10 pt, Line spacing: Exactly 14 pt,
         e)   Structured Planning as well as staff/faculty meetings are both considered          Numbered + Level: 1 + Numbering Style: a, b, c, … +
              “mandatory meetings” for purposes of this Article. The maximum number of           Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 1.5" + Indent
              mandatory meetings in elementary schools is eight (8) per month and the            at: 1.75", Adjust space between Latin and Asian text,
                                                                                                 Adjust space between Asian text and numbers




                                             35
       maximum number of mandatory meetings in secondary and post- secondary
       is five (5) per month. No schools will schedule more than two mandatory
       meetings in any week. Under no circumstances will there be more than one
       mandatory meeting on any given day. An administrator may substitute a
       staff/faculty meeting for a Structured Planning meeting or a Structured
       Planning meeting for a staff/faculty meeting, if deemed necessary but may not
       exceed the maximum number set forth above. A "mandatory meeting”
       excludes the following: any activity for which a teacher receives supplement or
       stipend, committee meetings for which a teacher volunteers, parent
       conferences, I.E.P and 504 meetings.

f)     At the end of every marking period, the five (5) workdays prior to grades being
       due will be without mandatory meetings for all teachers.

       General Provisions                                                                    Formatted: List Paragraph, Indent: Left: 0.63",
                                                                                             Hanging: 0.38", Space After: 10 pt, Line spacing:
2.g) No teacher shall be required to forfeit Uninterrupted Pplanning Ttime on a              Exactly 14 pt, No bullets or numbering
     regular or continuing basis. Teachers shall use their planning time during the
     student day for preparation of their instructional program and to assist in the
     preparation for or to follow through with assessments, grading and instruction.

3.     Whenever a teacher is present in a regular classroom for the purposes of              Formatted: Underline
       fulfilling the provisions of Article 27, Paragraph B.2, the regular classroom
       teacher shall be excused from the room and any duties pertaining thereto. The
       special opportunities provided by team teaching shall in no way be used to
       circumvent these provisions. The size of class or number of pupils under the
       control of any teacher shall not be increased to provide for the provisions of
       this Article. The needs of special programs (e.g., art, music, and P.E.) shall be
       considered. Planning time shall be of such length as to allow for appropriate
       activities.

h)     Except as provided in paragraph 5 b, Aany inservice or professional
       development offered during the teacher’s Uninterrupted Planning Time shall
       be voluntary for teachers, unless a TDE is provided.                                  Formatted: Font color: Auto

i)     The principal shall have authority to permit flexibility with regard to the Teacher
       Contractual Day when circumstances warrant. [not new just moved here]

4.j)   Except as provided in paragraph n below, teachers are not required to be on           Formatted: Justified, Indent: Left: 0.63", Hanging:
       duty longer than the Teacher Contractual Day without additional compensation          0.38", Space After: 10 pt, Line spacing: Exactly 14 pt,
       or compensatory time off.                                                             Numbered + Level: 1 + Numbering Style: a, b, c, … +
                                                                                             Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 1.5" + Indent
5.k) Parent Conferences may be scheduled outside the student instructional day               at: 1.75", Tab stops: 0.99", Left + Not at 1.47"
     with at least one day’s notice to the teacher. To the extent possible, Parent           Formatted: Font color: Auto
     Conferences should not interfere with classroom activities. A minimum of one
     (1) day per week (and excluding Fridays) will be free of Parent Conferences.

6.l)   I.E.P meetings and 504 meetings may take place at any time during the Teacher




                                       36
      Contractual Day except their Uninterrupted Planning Time, unless agreed upon
      by the teacher.

b)    .

7.    Teachers shall plan for instruction and maintain lesson plans either in a written       Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.63", Hanging: 0.38", Space
      or electronic format for the purpose of preparing daily lessons for each course         After: 10 pt, Line spacing: Exactly 14 pt, Numbered +
      they teach. Lesson plans shall be “standards based” and aligned to District             Level: 1 + Numbering Style: a, b, c, … + Start at: 1 +
                                                                                              Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 1.5" + Indent at: 1.75"
      curriculum resources and shall be followed with sufficient flexibility to allow for
      varying conditions, events, interruptions, and the varied needs of the students.
      Lesson plans shall be readily available for review by the administration and for
      the use of each potential substitute teacher who may be called upon to
      conduct the regular teacher’s classes. At the discretion of the administrator,
      teachers may be required to submit their lesson plans to the administrator for
      review.

m)    The administration will, to the extent possible, limit teachers’ Non-Teaching
      Duties and assure that such Non-Teaching Duties are evenly distributed among
      all teachers. The assignment of Non-Teaching Duties shall not be used as a
      punitive measure or as any form of discipline. Elementary School Non-
      Teaching Duties shall be limited to no more than thirty (30) minutes per day for
      any teacher.                                                                            Formatted: Font: 11 pt, Font color: Auto

8.n) Teachers may be are required to attend two (2) activities each semester
     outside of the Teacher Contractual Day. These activities are to be related to
     instruction (e.g. parent visitation, back-to-school nights). During the preschool
     period, the administration and the teachers shall develop a tentative schedule
     of evening activities for the year. The assignments for attending and
     participating in these activities shall be fairly and equitably distributed among
     all the teachers. [from article 39]

9.o) Teachers may leave at the close of the student instructional pupil day for good
     cause with the approval of the principal. [from article 39]

p)    Teachers will be allowed to leave school on election days for purposes of voting
      provided they have no student responsibilities and provided they are registered
      voters in the municipality or area in which the election is to be held. [from article
      39]

q)    The parties recognize that parents and students monitor student academic
      progress through grades entered in FOCUS, and it is important to enter
      grades timely. It is a reasonable expectation that teachers will enter grades
      within ten (10) working days from the completion of an assignment.
      Extensions may be requested and granted by principals for sufficient reasons
      related to the employee’s health, leave status, or other extenuating
      circumstances. [from article 39]

10.   r)     Except as it relates to graduating seniors, at least two (2) working days        Formatted: Font: 11 pt
      from the close of the grading period shall be allowed before grades are due.




                                       37
               During the post-school period, the above requirement may be changed should
               special circumstances dictate. [from article 39]


                               ARTICLE 28 COVERING CLASSES

When a teacher is absent, other teachers may be requested to volunteer to cover his/her class. If
no teacher volunteers, the students will be disbursed among other classes (excepting planning
time). Teachers who cover for absent colleagues may be compensated through a pro-ration of the
savings from not paying a substitute. If a classroom teacher or a member of the instructional staff
covers the class or classes of an absent teacher, he/she shall be eligible to receive twelve dollars
($12) per hour or period for each hour or class period provided in coverage. If less than an hour or
period, the amount will be prorated. If coverage extends beyond one hour, additional time will be
compensated at the rate of six dollars ($6) for each additional half-hour.



                                           ARTICLE 29

     SELECTION OF DEPARTMENT CHAIRS/TEAM LEADERS/GRADE LEVEL CHAIRS

Selection of positions such as department head, pro-ed facilitator, site-based coach and any
other position for which a stipend is paid shall be based upon criteria and a time frame
established at the school level between the principal and the faculty, department or team
affected. The criteria will be posted and communicated so all qualified, site-based personnel may
apply. Utilizing the input of the faculty, department or team affected, the principal and teachers
will have the opportunity to select the candidate best suited to serve between the administration
and faculty.


                              ARTICLE 30 FINANCIAL SUPPORT

A.      The Union Association will actively support all financial efforts of the School Board to       Formatted: No bullets or numbering, Tab stops: Not
increase funding to public education.agreed to by the Association, such as bond issues and millage     at 0.47"
elections.

B.     Annually, the Association and the Board will develop a list of mutual legislative priorities.
       The Board and the Association agree to mutually promote these goals. The Association
       will provide data and financial support as determined by the Association. The Board agrees
       to grant temporary duty elsewhere leave to teachers identified by the Association as a
       necessary for the promotion of these goals.


                              ARTICLE 31 30 TEACHER TRAVEL

A.     Teachers whose duties require travel between two (2) or more schools are authorized
       reimbursement for automobile use. They will be paid school board mileage rate for
       operating costs. When no "home school" exists in either practice or assignment, mileage
       shall be computed as follows: total authorized mileage per day minus round trip mileage to




                                                38
       nearest assigned school from teacher's home.

B.     If teachers are required to transport pupils to activities which take place away from the
        school grounds, they shall be reimbursed at the rate of school board mileage rate for the
        use of their personal automobile. Employees using personal cars for school business are
        required to carry liability insurance. Teachers who transport students on field trips or other
        school activities are required to maintain liability insurance in such amounts as required
        under Florida law. Students riding in teachers' cars on field trips and to various school
        meetings are covered by the liability car insurance carried by the teacher. The Board has
        a non-owner's liability policy which extends beyond the limits of the teacher's insurance. In
        order for additional coverage to apply, the name of the driver and the insurance carrier
        must be registered with the Board's administrator of risk management prior to the trip.

C.     Annually, the Board shall allocate an amount of discretionary travel funds to each school.


                               ARTICLE 32 31 TEACHER EVALUATION

PREAMBLE

The parties acknowledge that revisions to the agreement governing the teacher evaluation
system are necessary because of recent changes in applicable law. The teacher evaluation
system is intended to evaluate the performance of duties and responsibilities of all teachers
for the purpose of increasing student learning growth by improving the quality of instructional
services in the schools. It is the intent of the parties to continue to refine the evaluation
system in order to have a fair and reliable system for this purpose. to monitor this new
system to ensure, as much as reasonably possible, that it is a fair, valid, and reliable teacher
evaluation system and to make changes, as needed, to achieve this goal. The following
contract language will be subject to re-openers and review each within one year.

from its full implementation upon request by either party. Further, the parties agree that
should at any time the Florida law applicable to such evaluation procedures be changed or
overturned by final order of a court of competent jurisdiction to which the Pinellas County
School Board is subject, then in that event the parties agree to promptly renew collective
bargaining negotiations for the purposes of modifying the procedures set forth in this article.

Definitions:

         A.    Deliberate Practice Plan: This consists of targeted elements and action steps
               designed to improve teacher practice as it relates to impacting student
               progress. The Deliberate Practice Plan and the progress made toward
               accomplishing the targeted element(s) and action steps will be discussed at
               each of the post-observation conferences. Teachers and administrators will                Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial, Font color: Accent 5
               collaborate to identify the targeted element(s). If the teacher and administrator
               cannot agree on a single targeted element, the administrator may choose a
               targeted element consistent with the school improvement plan or area of                   Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial, Font color: Accent 5
               concern and the teacher may or may not choose one or more additional
                                                                                                         Formatted: Font: 11 pt, Font color: Accent 5
               targeted elements and action step.
                                                                                                         Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.63", Hanging: 0.38",
                                                                                                         Widow/Orphan control, Tab stops: 0.63", Left




                                                 39
G.     B.     Feedback: Written or verbal comments from the administrator to the        Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial, 11 pt, Font color: Auto
       teacher regarding the observation.

C.     Final Evaluation: This includes all components of the Teacher Evaluation
       System. Specifically, it includes the instructional practice score (sometimes
       referred to as the “administrative review”), the deliberate practice score and
       the student growth score. It is the Summative Evaluation plus the student
       growth score.

D.   Formal Observation: This consists of a pre-observation conference between
     the administrator and the teacher, the observation, (which should be a
     minimum of 30 minutes) and a post observation conference with the teacher.
D. Formative Evaluation: This is the evaluation conducted with teachers on a
     probationary contract within the first sixty (60) workdays of employment. Its
     purpose is to help the teacher develop his/her practice.

E. Informal Observation: This observation is approximately 10-20 minutes with
      feedback.

EE. Observation: This is the period of time in which the administrator watches the
    teacher instructing the lesson. During the observation, the administrator will
    collect data regarding the instruction. Feedback will be provided within three
    (3) days. An observation can be “formal” or “informal” as defined above.

F.G. Post-Observation Conference: A conference between the administrator and
     the teacher which shall be scheduled within five (5) days after the observation
     (whether formal or targeted) after the observation where the administrator
     provides feedback. The teacher. may bring evidence relating to any element
     scored during the observation as well as evidence relating to Domain 1
     “Standards Based Planning” (“Planning and Preparing to Provide Support” for
     non-classroom teacher evaluation) and Domain 4 “Professional
     Responsibility”. Within five (5) days after the post-observation conference, a
     teacher may submit additional evidence related to any domain to be
     considered by the administrator. The administrator shall review the additional
     evidence submitted and will notify the teacher in writing of their decision.

FG. Pre-Observation Conference: A conference between the administrator and the
    teacher where the teacher advises the administrator what to expect during the
    classroom observation allowing the administrator to ask clarifying questions.
    The pre-observation form may be used in lieu of the face-to-face conference
    upon approval of both parties.

GH.G.       Summative Evaluation: This evaluation includes all components of the
     Teacher Evaluation System except the student growth score. Specifically, it
     includes the instructional practice score (sometimes referred to as the
     “administrative review”) and the deliberate practice score.
The teacher will complete a self-evaluation and submit it to the administrator to be
     considered as part of the Summative Evaluation.                                    Formatted: Normal, Indent: Left: 0.63", Hanging:
                                                                                        0.38", Don't adjust space between Latin and Asian text,
HIH.           Targeted Observation: This is an observation which may be requested      Don't adjust space between Asian text and numbers,
       by the teacher and will be limited to the observation of no more than four       Tab stops: 0.63", Left




                                      40
              elements, one of which must be “identifying critical content from the
              standards.” The targeted observation must be scheduled within five days of
              one of the post observation conferences.

         J.   Teacher Evaluation System: A collaborative system between teachers and
              administrators which focuses on increasing student learning growth by
              improving the quality of instructional services. The overall term used for the
              performance evaluation of a teacher.

         K.
         L.K. Walkthrough: A brief visit to the classroom which will not be used for
              evaluative purposes for Domain 2 “Standards Based Instruction” (“Supporting
              Student Achievement” for non- classroom teacher evaluation) or Domain 3
              “Conditions for Learning” (Continuous Improvement of Professional Practice”
              for non-classroom teacher evaluation) in “Domain 1” as described on the
              evaluation instrument but may be used for other domains.

Section A. Teacher Evaluation- General Provisions

       1.     The Superintendent shall establish procedures for evaluating the performance
              of duties and responsibilities of all teachers. and will consider input from the
              Appraisal Advisory Committee. The Appraisal Advisory Committee                      Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial, 11 pt
              membership will be comprised of 50% instructional personnel appointed by the
              Union and 50% district staff.
              The evaluation forms and procedures to be used will comply with all
              requirements as set forth in Section 1012.34, F.S.

       2.     The evaluator shall be trained and certified in the evaluation tool and must be
              the person responsible for supervising the teacher.

       3.     In accordance with Section 1012.34, F.S. teachers in their first three (3) years
              of employment will be rated as either Highly Effective, Effective, Developing or
              Unsatisfactory. All other teachers will be rated as either Highly Effective,
              Effective, Needs Improvement or Unsatisfactory. These ratings shall be
              described in the Evaluation Manual.

Section B. Evaluation of Teachers on a Probationary Contract

       1.     There will be at least two Informal Observations and three wo Formal
              Observations..

       2.     If the teacher starts employment at the beginning of the school year, tThe first
              Formal Observation Formative Evaluation will be completed after the first
              twenty (20) days but within in the first sixty (60) workdays of their employment.
              Specific recommendations shall be provided to teachers to facilitate
              improvement in their instruction. The last of the three Formal Observations
              must be scheduled no later than the end of the third grading period. If the
              teacher starts employment after the school year has commenced, the schedule
              for conducting the Formal Observations will be prorated.




                                              41
       3.    It is expected that the teacher be given support, feedback and assistance to
             help develop their teaching skills. A mentor teacher shall be assigned, except
             in rare circumstances where it is not practical to do so.

       4.    The Summative Evaluation shall be completed no later than four (4) weeks
             prior to the end of the post-school year.
       Within three workdays after the Post-Observation Conference held in connection with
             the Summative Evaluation, a teacher may submit additional evidence to be
             considered by the principal regarding “Domains 2, 3 and 4” as described on the
             evaluation instrument. An additional conference may be scheduled if the
             principal believes the evidence submitted requires clarification. The teacher will
             be notified in writing of the decision of the principal related to the additional
             evidence if an additional conference is not conducted.

       5.    The teacher will sign or electronically acknowledge the Summative Evaluation.
             The teacher’s signature or acknowledgement indicates receipt of the
             Summative Evaluation and does not necessarily indicate agreement with its
             contents. The Final Evaluation shall be completed following the distribution of
             student achievement data results from the Florida Department of Education.

       6.    Pursuant to Florida law, a teacher on a probationary contract may be
             dismissed without cause, may be non-renewed without cause or may resign
             from the contractual position without breach of contract.

       7.    If an administrator has performance concerns regarding a probationary
             teacher, the teacher will be afforded assistance through professional
             development tailored to the needs of the probationary teacher.

Section C. Evaluation of Teachers on Annual Contract, Professional Service Contract (PSC)
or Continuing Contact (CC)

      1.     All Annual, PSC and CC teachers will be evaluated annually and must have at
             least two one Formal Observations, one to occur during the first semester and
             one to occur in the second semester. The second Formal Observation must be
             scheduled by the end of the third grading period. A teacher may also request a
             Targeted Observation as described in paragraph I herein. and three Informal
             Observations. A minimum of three of these observations must occur no later
             than the end of the third grading period.

      2.      The Summative Evaluation shall be completed no later than four (4) weeks
              prior to the end of the post-school year.
      Within three (3) workdays after the Post-Observation Conference held in connection
              with the Summative Evaluation, a teacher may submit additional evidence to
              be considered by the principal regarding “Domains 2, 3 and 4” as described on
              the evaluation instrument. An additional conference may be scheduled if the
              principal believes the evidence submitted requires clarification. The teacher will
              be notified in writing of the decision of the principal related to the additional
              evidence if an additional conference is not conducted.

      3.     The teacher will sign or electronically acknowledge the Summative Evaluation.
             The teacher’s signature or electronic acknowledgement indicates receipt of the




                                              42
              Summative Evaluation and does not necessarily indicate agreement with its
              contents. The Final Evaluation shall be completed following the distribution of
              student achievement data results from the Florida Department of Education.

      4.      If an administrator has performance concerns regarding an annual contract
              teacher, a PSC or CC teacher, the teacher will be afforded assistance through
              professional development and a prescribed improvement plan; provided,
              however, that any such development and plan will not affect the teacher’s
              status as an annual contract teacher. An annual contract teacher may be non-
              renewed at the end of their annual contract subject to the right to appeal as set
              forth in Article 36.Section D.

Section D. Teacher’s Remedy if Evaluation Process Not Followed

A teacher may file a grievance if the teacher believes that the process for conducting the
evaluation was not followed. A grievance is not available to challenge a rating in any of the
categories on the evaluation, to challenge the student growth score or student achievement
data, deliberate practice score, or to challenge the final rating. In the event that the process
for conducting the evaluation was not followed, which includes any deviation from a timeline
established in this Article, the exclusive remedy is for the evaluator to conduct that aspect of
the flawed process over again. In order for this remedy to be available, the teacher must file
a grievance within ten five (105) days of the process violation giving rise to the grievance.
The grievance will immediately be heard as a Level 2 grievance such that the remedy, if any,
can be completed prior to the end of the school year.

Section E. Provisional Remedy for the 2018-2019 Evaluation

   1. Beginning with the 2018-2019 school year, the School Board adopted the Marzano               Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial, 11 pt, Font color: Auto
      Focused Model following recommendations from the Appraisal Advisory Committee
                                                                                                   Formatted: Space After: 8 pt, Don't add space
      to, among other things, reduce the number of elements rated, change the method of            between paragraphs of the same style, Line spacing:
      scoring from conjunctive scoring to acceptance of the highest rating, and increase           Multiple 1.08 li, Numbered + Level: 1 + Numbering
      dialogue in the observation process by eliminating the informal observation and              Style: 1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned
      replacing with at least two formal observations and an opportunity for an additional         at: 0.25" + Indent at: 0.5", Widow/Orphan control
      “targeted observation”. The parties believe these changes are an improvement to
      the Teacher Evaluation System.
                                                                                                   Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", Don't add space
   2. Because the Marzano Focused Model is new, the parties agree that an additional               between paragraphs of the same style, Widow/Orphan
      level of oversight is warranted during the first year of its implementation and              control
                                                                                                   Formatted: Space After: 8 pt, Don't add space
      accordingly, the District’s professional development department and a representative         between paragraphs of the same style, Line spacing:
      of the union, will review the process followed by the administrators at any school           Multiple 1.08 li, Numbered + Level: 1 + Numbering
      where anomalies exist. For purposes of this provision, an anomaly means any school           Style: 1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned
      where the summative evaluations demonstrate a significant variance from the district         at: 0.25" + Indent at: 0.5", Widow/Orphan control
      average. In the event that the group determines that the reason for the anomaly is           Formatted: Font: 11 pt, Font color: Auto, Not Highlight
      because the administrator did not follow the process, the summative evaluation
                                                                                                   Formatted: Font: 11 pt, Font color: Auto, Not Highlight
      ratings for teachers at the school will be adjusted to reflect the district average.
                                                                                                   Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial, 11 pt, Font color: Auto
   3. This provision will sunset after the 2018-2019 school year.
                                                                                                   Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", Don't add space
                                                                                                   between paragraphs of the same style, Widow/Orphan




                                               43
Section E. Annual and Probationary Contract Teacher’s Right to Appeal the Non-Renewal or
Decision not to Grant a Contract

1. Teachers on a probationary contract, who have completed their contract term and
received a score of Effective or Highly Effective on their Summative Evaluation, may appeal
the principal’s decision not to recommend the renewal of their annual contract.

2. Annual contract teachers who received a score of Effective or Highly Effective on their
Summative Evaluation or who received less than Effective on their Summative Evaluation but
had received Effective or Highly Effective on their Final Evaluations for each of the three
preceding years, may appeal the principal’s decision not to recommend the renewal of their
annual contract.

3. To initiate the appeal, the teacher will submit a written request to the Assistant
Superintendent for Human Resources who will schedule a meeting with the Area
Superintendent, the teacher and his/her representative. The principal and other staff called
upon by the Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources will also be present at the
meeting. The principal will explain the basis upon which the decision not to renew or offer an
annual contract, was made. The Area Superintendent and the Assistant Superintendent for
Human Resources will determine the appropriateness of the recommendation. Such
determination shall be in their sole discretion and shall not require just cause. There shall be
no appeal from or challenge to their decision nor shall it constitute a basis for grievance.

4. If the recommendation which is the subject of the appeal is determined to be appropriate,
the teacher shall be notified. If the recommendation is determined to be inappropriate, the
Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources may direct that the teacher remain at the
school or may find alternative placement.

Section E.F. Evaluation Appeal Process

1. Annual, PSC or CC teachers have the right to appeal their Final Evaluation if the rating
would constitute grounds for termination pursuant to Section 1012.33, F.S. and Section
1012.335, F.S.

2. The appeal shall be reviewed by a three (3) member panel which shall include the Area
Superintendent, the Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources and the
Superintendent’s designee. This panel’s decision is final but does not replace a right to a
hearing under Section 1012.33, F.S. and Section 1012.335, F.S.


                                ARTICLE 321 TEACHER FILES                                             Formatted: Font: Bold

A.      Each teacher shall have the right to review by appointment the contents of his/her
personnel file. Upon prior notification in writing by the teacher, another individual may accompany
the teacher in such review. The review shall be made in the presence of the administrator
responsible for the safekeeping of such file. Wherein jeopardy of the teacher’s position is
involved, fFacilities shall be available for the teacher at his/her own expense to make photocopies
of such contents and records as concerns his/her work or himself/herself. Costs associated with
reproduction of such documents shall be paid by the employee at the time of the request.

B.     No secret files shall be maintained either in the school or in Central Administration.




                                                44
Derogatory material that has not been brought to the attention of the teacher pursuant to Florida
Statute shall not be admissible in any action against the teacher. These actions shall include, but
not be limited to: termination, promotion, and/or transfer.

C.       A teacher shall have the right to answer in writing any complaint filed in his/her personnel
file (school based or county) and the answer shall be reviewed by the Superintendent or the
Superintendent's designee and then attached to the complaint.

D.     When, through the grievance procedure, any data is shown to be incorrect or
unsubstantiated, a copy of the grievance award shall be attached to the file with the notation that
the material contained therein was deemed inappropriate.

E.      School files are considered to be personnel files as defined in Florida Statutes. These files
will be handled according to district guidelines that are available in each school.

F.     Standard rules of evidence shall apply to all materials admissible in any disciplinary action
against the teacher.

G.     All matters related to a teacher's performance or status shall be confidential within the
scope allowed by the Public Records Act. public documents law. Exemption will be allowed only
when agreed to in writing by the teacher.




                                  ARTICLE 34 33 COMPLAINTS

A.      The principal shall accept and acknowledge complaints against teachers.

B.      The principal shall confer with the teacher and inform the teacher of the complaint. The
        principal shall inform the teacher of his/her response, the action the principal contemplates,
        and the results of such action. When any action will affect the status of the teacher, a written
        record shall be made.

C.      The Board will not tolerate harassment, or abuse of teachers by parents, other citizens,
        students and/or other Board employees.

D.      Anonymous complaints shall be so recorded. No action affecting the teacher's status shall
        be instituted based solely upon an anonymous complaint.


            ARTICLE 35 34 CONDITIONS FOR SUPPLEMENTAL COMPENSATION

A.     It shall be the responsibility of the principal or other designated agent of the Board to
        recommend, on an annual basis, those individuals who are to receive salary supplements.
        Should special circumstances dictate, the principal may realign the nature of supplements.
        All supplements shall expire on the last day of the employee's work year.

B.      Positions which qualify an individual for additional compensation shall be those maintained
        by the Human Resource Office for budgetary purposes. Amendments to this listing shall be
        accomplished through the bargaining process. The parties encourage individual faculties




                                                  45
       to develop alternative supplement models. The parties shall provide adequate financial and
       planning resources to those schools that create staffing models which promise improved
       educational opportunities.

C.B.   It is the intent of the parties that supplements are paid for additional responsibilities           Formatted: Tab stops: Not at 0.48"
       requiring additional time during or after the school day. It is the responsibility of the
       supplement receiver and their immediate supervisor to determine the extent of the
       responsibilities. Disputes will be resolved by the parties. The supplemental compensation
       is available for additional responsibilities related to academics, athletics, fine arts and other
       activities as described in Appendix __.

                                                                                                           Formatted: No bullets or numbering, Tab stops: Not
C      The parties agree to continue to review the amount payable for supplemental                         at 0.48"
       compensation through a committee comprised of an equal number of district and union
       representatives which will meet at least once each school year and make
       recommendations to the bargaining teams to include such recommendations in
       negotiations over salary for each school year.

D.     Unless otherwise approved by Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources, high
       school teachers are not eligible for more than three supplements and middle school
       teachers are not eligible for more than three supplements.

                            ARTICLE 36 35 TEACHER CONTRACTS

A.     DEFINITIONS - As used in this Article, the term:

       1.     “Annual contract” means an employment contract for a period of one (1) school year
              that the Board may choose to award or not award without cause.

       2.     “Probationary contract” means an employment contract for a period of one (1)
              school year awarded to teachers upon initial employment in the school district. A
              probationary contract will be awarded regardless of previous employment in another
              school district or state. Probationary contract teachers may be dismissed without
              cause or may resign without breach of contract. The Board may not award a
              probationary contract more than once to the same teacher except as provided under
              S. 1012.335 F.S..                                                                            Formatted: Font color: Auto

       2.     “Professional Service Contract” and “Continuing Contract” means a contract with              Formatted: Space After: 10 pt, Outline numbered +
              continuing employment rights in accordance with the law in effect prior to July 1,           Level: 1 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … + Start at: 1 +
              2011. Any teacher who held a professional service contract or continuing contract            Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 0" + Indent at: 0"
              as of July 1, 2011, will continue to hold them in accordance with Sec. 1012.33 and
              this Agreement. All such contracts, except continuing contracts, shall contain
              provisions for dismissal during the term of the contract only for just cause as
              provided by Florida law.

B.     EMPLOYMENT

       1.     Each individual newly hired as a teacher by the Board will be awarded a
              probationary contract. Upon successful completion of the probationary contract, the
              Board may award an annual contract pursuant to paragraph (B.2b).Employees who




                                                 46
               have been dismissed by the Board from a probationary contract without cause may
               apply for posted positions at other schools within the district without delay.

       2.      An annual contract may be awarded to teachers who successfully completed a
               probationary contract or have received one or more annual contracts from the Board
               and who meet these conditions:

               a.      Hold an active professional certificate or temporary certificate issued
                       pursuant to s. 1012.56 and rules of the State Board of Education;

               b.      Have been recommended by the Superintendent for the annual contract
                       based upon the individual’s evaluation under s. 1012.34 and approved by
                       the Board; and

               c.      Have not received two consecutive annual performance evaluation ratings
                       of unsatisfactory, two annual performance evaluation ratings of
                       unsatisfactory within a three (3) year period, or three (3) consecutive annual
                       performance evaluation ratings of needs improvement or a combination of
                       needs improvement and unsatisfactory.
                                                                                                           Formatted: Font color: Auto
C.     REAPPOINTMENTS.

       If an annual contract teacher is not to be recommended for reappointment, the teacher               Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", First line: 0"
       shall be notified by the HR Department via the principal at the time the principal makes
       his or her decision. This notification shall not be later than four (4) weeks prior to the end
       of the post-school year.



D.     VIOLATION OF ANNUAL CONTRACT.
Teachers who accept a written offer from the Board and who leave their positions without prior
      release from the Board are subject to the jurisdiction of the Education Practices
      Commission.
E.D.   LIMITATION.

       An individual newly hired as a teacher, or any district teacher who did not hold a
       professional services or continuing contract as of July 1, 2011, is ineligible for a professional
       services or continuing contract, unless a final non-appealable order of a court of competent
       jurisdiction reaffirms the teacher’s right to achieve a professional service contract.

       1.      Those teachers who held professional service contracts or continuing contracts as
               of July 1, 2011, will continue to hold them in accordance with Sec. 1012.33 and this
               Agreement. All such contracts, except continuing contracts, shall contain provisions
               for dismissal during the term of the contract only for just cause as set forth in Article
               37.

       2.      Any teacher who violates the terms of such contract or agreement by leaving his or
               her position without first being released from his or her contract or agreement by
               the Board shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Education Practices Commission.




                                                 47
     3.   A professional service contract shall be renewed each year unless:

          a.      The district school superintendent, after receiving the recommendations
                  required by Sec. 1012.34, charges the teacher with unsatisfactory
                  performance and notifies the teacher of performance deficiencies as
                  required by Sec. 1012.34; or

          b.      The teacher receives two (2) consecutive annual performance evaluation
                  ratings of unsatisfactory under s. 1012.34, two (2) annual performance
                  evaluation ratings of unsatisfactory within a three (3) year period under s.
                  1012.34, or three consecutive annual performance evaluation ratings of
                  needs improvement or a combination of needs improvement and
                  unsatisfactory under Sec. 1012.34.

E.   NON-RENEWALS                                                                                Formatted: Indent: Left: 0", Hanging: 0.44",
                                                                                                 Numbered + Level: 1 + Numbering Style: A, B, C, … +
     1.   Any teacher whose annual contract was not renewed may immediately apply for any        Start at: 3 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 0.75" +
          available position within the District provided that they are certified, have not      Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", Hanging: 0.44",
          received discipline in the form of a Letter of Reprimand or above for that year, and   Numbered + Level: 1 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
          have received a rating on the Summative Evaluation of Effective or Highly Effective    Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 1.06" +
                                                                                                 Indent at: 1.31", Tab stops: Not at 1.46"
          for that year or the preceding year.
                                                                                                 Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", Hanging: 0.44"
     2.   Upon request, the principal will provide a written summary of the rationale for the    Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", Hanging: 0.44",
          decision not to recommend renewal of an annual contract.                               Numbered + Level: 1 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, … +
                                                                                                 Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 1.06" +
F.   APPEAL OF NONRENEWAL OF ANNUAL CONTRACT OR DECISION NOT TO GRANT                            Indent at: 1.31"
     ANNUAL CONTRACT [not new just moved here from article 32]

     1.   Teachers on a probationary contract, who have completed their contract term and
          received a score of Effective or Highly Effective on their Summative Evaluation,
          may appeal the principal’s decision not to recommend the issuance of an annual
          contract.

     2.   Annual contract teachers at a Tier I or Tier II school who received a score of
          Effective or Highly Effective on their Summative Evaluation or who received less
          than Effective on their Summative Evaluation but had received Effective or Highly
          Effective on their Final Evaluations for each of the three preceding years, may
          appeal the principal’s decision not to recommend the renewal of their annual
          contract.

     3.    Annual contract teachers at a Tier III or Tier IV school have an expanded right to
          appeal the non- renewal their contract. If the annual contract teacher received less
          than Effective on their Summative Evaluation but had not worked three years, the
          teacher may nevertheless appeal the principal’s decision not to recommend the
          renewal of their annual contract if they had received Effective or Highly Effective
          for each of the years they had been employed.

     4.   To initiate the appeal, the teacher will submit a written request to the Assistant




                                            48
                Superintendent for Human Resources who will schedule a meeting with the Area
                Superintendent, the teacher and his/her representative. The principal and other
                staff called upon by the Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources will also
                be present at the meeting. The principal will explain the basis upon which the
                decision not to renew or offer an annual contract was made. The Area
                Superintendent and the Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources will
                determine the appropriateness of the recommendation. Such determination shall
                be in their sole discretion and shall not require just cause. There shall be no appeal
                from or challenge to their decision nor shall it constitute a basis for grievance.

       1.5.     If the recommendation which is the subject of the appeal is determined to be
                appropriate, the teacher shall be notified. If the recommendation is determined to
                be inappropriate, the Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources may direct
                that the teacher remain at the school or may find alternative placement.

F. Annual contract teachers who receive a Summative Evaluation rating of Effective or Highly
Effective on their current annual evaluation will be recommended by their principal and area
superintendent for renewal of their annual contract for the following year and the Superintendent
will endorse their recommendation on a School Board meeting agenda, so long as the conditions
listed below are met. The Superintendent may, in his discretion, recommend the renewal of a
teacher who does not meet the conditions in this Article 36, but is not obligated to do so.

       1.     The teacher meets or is in the process of meeting all necessary eligibility
              requirements related to certification, highly qualified status, and ESOL status;
              however, all requirements for the current year must be met by June 30th of the
              current school year. The parties understand that some certifications require multiple
              years to complete, such as the ESOL 300 hour endorsement or the gifted 300 hour
              endorsement. In cases of multiple year certifications, only the current year’s
              requirement must be met by June 30 of the current year.

       2.     The teacher has not received a letter of reprimand or suspension with or without pay,
              during the school year;

       3.     No Reduction in Force occurs in accordance with Article 22 of this Agreement; and

       4.     A vacancy exists at the same school; if no such vacancy exists, but all other
              conditions above are me, then the District will place the teacher in a position at
              another school in the District.

        The employee’s sole remedy if this provision is not followed is to appeal to a committee
comprised of four people: The Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources, a person chosen
by the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources and two members chosen by the
Association. Should this committee be unable to reach a majority decision then the language
above will be upheld and the teacher will be renewed. If the nonrenewal is deemed to be
appropriate, the teacher shall be notified. If the nonrenewal is deemed to be inappropriate, the




                                                  49
Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources may direct the teacher to remain at the school or
may find alternative placement.

G.     Length of Instructional Contracts.                                                               Formatted: Font: 11 pt

       1.     Instructional contracts shall be for a period of one hundred and ninety- eight            Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial, 11 pt, Not Bold
              (198) days. The Board reserves the right to offer contracts in excess of one              Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial, 11 pt, Not Bold
              hundred and ninety eight days if deemed warranted by the needs of the
                                                                                                        Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial, 11 pt, Not Bold
              program.
                                                                                                        Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial, 11 pt
       2.     Regular full-time post- secondary vocational instructors will generally receive           Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial, 11 pt, Not Bold
              contracts for two hundred thirty five (235) days. However, such contracts shall
                                                                                                        Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", Hanging: 0.44", Space
              be based on curricular and program needs for specific instructional areas and
                                                                                                        After: 8 pt, Line spacing: Multiple 1.08 li, Adjust space
              shall be contingent upon sufficient student enrollment as determined by
                                                                                                        between Latin and Asian text, Adjust space between
              accepted staffing ratios. In the event that student enrollment is insufficient to         Asian text and numbers
              warrant two hundred thirty five (235) days of continuous service, the number of
              days may be reduced by administration using as the criteria: needs of the
              program, certification, qualification, and seniority in the district. [from article 45]


       3.      Regular full-time post- secondary vocational instructors on a two hundred
               thirty five (235) day contract who has taught ten (10) continuous years shall be
               permitted to return to one hundred ninety eight (198) day contract once every
               five (5) years for personal or professional reason provided that adequate
               coverage is obtained. No more than three percent (3%) of the instructional
               staff in that school center shall be granted such leave during any school year.
               However, upon appropriate justification and approval by the director and the
               Chief Operating Officer/PTEC, a vocational teacher holding a two hundred
               thirty five (235) day contract may be granted a one hundred ninety eight (198)
               day contract for a period not to exceed one (1) academic year. Such alteration
               of contract shall be contingent upon the availability of qualified instructors to
               replace the teacher and the ability of the center to provide adequate coverage
               of necessary program material. It shall be the responsibility of the director to
               establish limits on the number of employees to be approved under this
               provision. [from article 45]

       4.               The Board agrees that the unique nature of certain programs requires            Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial, 11 pt, Font color: Auto
               additional time and resources. Consequently, when circumstances dictate the
                                                                                                        Formatted: List Paragraph, Indent: Left: 0.5", Hanging:
               need, additional duty contracts may be offered to designated personnel. [from
                                                                                                        0.5", Numbered + Level: 1 + Numbering Style: 1, 2, 3, …
               article 45]                                                                              + Start at: 1 + Alignment: Left + Aligned at: 1.06" +
                                                                                                        Indent at: 1.31"

      ARTICLE 37 36 DISCIPLINE, SUSPENSION, DISMISSAL AND RESIGNATION OF
                                    TEACHERS

A.     The School District follows a system of progressive discipline in dealing with deficiencies in
       employee work performance or conduct. Progressive discipline consists of a conference
       summary, caution, reprimand, suspension without pay, and dismissal. A coaching memo is not
       considered a form of discipline. The severity of the problem or employee conduct will
       determine whether all steps will be followed. When there is a range of penalties within school




                                                50
     board policy, aggravating or mitigating circumstances will be considered. An employee may
     submit a written rebuttal to any form of discipline.Discipline of teachers including but not
     necessarily limited to dismissal, reprimand, or suspension, shall be for just cause. .

B.   Instructional personnel are subject to suspension or dismissal as provided for in Sections
      1012.33, 1012.335 and 1012.34, Florida Statutes.

C.   Procedure

     1.     The procedure for suspension, dismissal and return to annual contract status for
            Continuing Contract teachers shall be governed by Sec. 1012.33(4), F.S.

     2.     Professional Service Contract teachers may be suspended or dismissed at any time
            during the term of the contract for just cause as provided above. The Board must
            notify the employee in writing whenever charges are made against the employee
            and may suspend such person without pay; but, if the charges are not sustained,
            the employee shall be immediately reinstated, and his or her back salary shall be
            paid. If the employee wishes to contest the charges, the employee must, within
            fifteen (15) days after receipt of the written notice, submit a written request for a
            hearing. Such hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law judge assigned
            by the Division of Administrative Hearings of the Department of Management
            Services. The recommendation of the administrative law judge shall be made to the
            Board. A majority vote of the membership of the Board shall be required to sustain
            or change the administrative law judge’s recommendation. The determination of the
            Board shall be final as to the sufficiency or insufficiency of the grounds for
            termination of employment.

     3.     Annual Contract teachers may be suspended or dismissed at any time during the
            term of the contract for just cause as provided above. The Board shall notify the
            employee in writing whenever charges are made and may suspend such person
            without pay. However, if the charges are not sustained, the employee shall be
            immediately reinstated and his or her back pay shall be paid. If the employee wishes
            to contest the charges, he or she must, within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the
            written notice, submit a written request for a hearing to the Board. A direct hearing
            shall be conducted by the Board or a subcommittee thereof within sixty (60) days
            after receipt of the written request. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance
            with Sec. 120.569 and 120.57, F.S. A majority vote of the membership of the Board
            shall be required to sustain the Superintendent’s recommendation. The Board’s
            determination is final as to the sufficiency or insufficiency of the grounds for
            suspension without pay or dismissal. Any such decision adverse to the employee
            may be appealed by the employee pursuant to Sec. 120.68, F.S.

     4.     The Board sits in a quasi-judicial capacity with respect to employee discipline cases,
            both those referred to the Division of Administrative Hearings and those it hears
            directly. The Uniform Rules of Procedure, Chapter 120, and Board policy 0133 shall
            govern shall apply to and govern the Board’s quasi-judicial proceedings as
            applicable.




                                              51
D.     Resignation.

        The Board has delegated to the Superintendent the authority to accept or reject
        resignations on the Board's behalf and to suspend teachers for up to three (3) days without
        pay. All resignations shall be irrevocable by the resignee once tendered unless the
        Superintendent otherwise consents in writing. The resignation shall be submitted to the
        Board at a regular or special meeting.

     ARTICLE 378 PROFESSIONAL SERVICE CONTRACT PERFORMANCE PROBATION

If a teacher who holds a professional service contract as provided in Sec. 1012.33 is not performing
his or her duties in a satisfactory manner, the evaluator shall notify the teacher in writing of such
determination. The notice must describe such unsatisfactory performance and include notice of the
following procedural requirements:

Upon delivery of a notice of unsatisfactory performance, the evaluator must confer with the teacher
who holds a professional service contract, make recommendations with respect to specific areas
of unsatisfactory performance, and provide assistance in helping to correct deficiencies within a
prescribed period of time.

The teacher who holds a professional service contract shall be placed on performance probation
and governed by the provisions of this section for ninety (90) calendar days following the receipt of
the notice of unsatisfactory performance to demonstrate corrective action. School holidays and
school vacation periods are not counted when calculating the ninety (90) calendar-day period.
During the ninety (90) calendar days, the teacher who holds a professional service contract must
be evaluated periodically and apprised of progress achieved and must be provided assistance and
in-service training opportunities to help correct the noted performance deficiencies. At any time
during the ninety (90) calendar days, the teacher who holds a professional service contract may
request a transfer to another appropriate position with a different supervising administrator;
however, if a transfer is granted pursuant to Sections 1012.27(1) and 1012.28(6), it does not extend
the period for correcting performance deficiencies.

Within fourteen (14) days after the close of the ninety (90) calendar days, the evaluator must
evaluate whether the performance deficiencies have been corrected and forward a
recommendation to the district school superintendent.

Within fourteen (14) days after receiving the evaluator's recommendation, the district school
superintendent must notify the teacher who holds a professional service contract in writing whether
the performance deficiencies have been satisfactorily corrected and whether the district school
superintendent will recommend that the Board continue or terminate his or her employment
contract. If the teacher wishes to contest the district school superintendent’s recommendation, the
teacher must, within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the district school superintendent’s
recommendation, submit a written request for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by an
administrative law judge assigned by the Division of Administrative Hearings of the Department of
Management Services. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with chapter 120. The
recommendation of the administrative law judge shall be made to the Board. A majority vote of the
membership of the district school board shall be required to sustain or change the administrative
law judge’s recommendation. The determination of the Board shall be final as to the sufficiency or
insufficiency of the grounds for termination of employment.




                                                 52
                                ARTICLE 39 TEACHING LOADS
                                                                                                        Formatted: Body text (2)1, Justified, Indent: Left: 0",
A.        Teachers may be required to attend the following staff meetings:                              Line spacing: Exactly 13.9 pt
1.        Building meetings called by the principal except that if such meetings require more time      Formatted: Justified, Space After: 0 pt, Line spacing:
than the regular school day permits, teachers will be given compensatory time off.                      Exactly 13.9 pt, No bullets or numbering, Tab stops:
2.        All meetings during work hours shall be used only to ensure effective school operation.       Not at 0.47"
3.        Except as provided for in Article 15, teachers may be required to attend two (2) activities
each semester outside the regular working day. Said meetings are to be involved with the
communications of instruction (e.g. parent visitation, back-to-school). During the preschool period,
the staff shall develop a tentative schedule of evening activities for the year. In schools which do
not utilize the optimum number of meetings as described above, faculties shall establish reasonable
and appropriate activities as substitutions for the above. If said activity involves the control and
supervision of students, the assignments shall be fairly and equitably distributed among the entire
staff.
4.        All other non-voluntary activities outside the regular school day which involve the
supervision of students will qualify the teacher for compensatory time or satisfactory supplemental
compensation.
B.        Parent-teacher conferences shall be arranged so as not to interfere with classroom
activities.
C.        Within the parameters established by the Agreement, it shall be the responsibility and
prerogative of the Board to establish the schedule and courses of instruction to be offered to
students at all grade levels. Secondary students will be provided seven (7) courses of instruction
per semester during the life of this agreement. The daily/weekly schedule for all teachers shall be
designed to maximize instructional contact time with students in the classroom. Any high school
credit classes shall comply with Sec. 1003.436, F.S. Instruction shall be provided in accordance
with the schedule created for each school. Sufficient staffing shall be provided to meet required
state statutes. In developing the master schedule, the principal will: [part moved to article 27]
                                                                                                        Formatted: Font color: Black
        1.    Use a differentiated budgeting process to provide for the needs of his/her school.

        2.    Solicit and utilize input into the development of the master schedule. Input provided
              through departmental, team and/or Small Learning Community (SLC) structures
              shall include: required daily planning time for faculty; balancing loads among staff;
              maximizing teaming opportunities; utilizing individual experience and strengths for
              maximum effect; utilizing blocks of time when best suited for delivery of instruction;
              and number of preparations required of individual teachers pursuant to Section F. of
              this Article.

        3.     Maximize teaming opportunities where appropriate, utilize the individual strengths
              and qualifications of staff and consider the effective use of blocks of time when best
              suited for delivery of instruction.

        4.    Where a faculty wishes to develop a schedule that requires a waiver of specific
               contractual provisions and is viable from a financial and logistical perspective, a
               two- thirds vote shall be required pursuant to current contract language in effect.
               Only instructional personnel who will be at the school when the waiver is




                                                 53
                implemented are eligible to vote. An eligible voter, at a minimum, must work at
                the school fifty (50) percent of the school day. No revote on the same waiver or
                variation of that waiver is permitted within a ten (10)-month period from the
                original vote and must be for the next school year. All such proposals shall be
                submitted in writing to the parties for consideration. A secret-ballot election will
                be held by the Principal’s Designee and the Lead PCTA Faculty Representative
                or a representative from the Association.

D.A.   Instructional related time may include planning time, necessary faculty meetings, assisting
        students, parent conferences, and other activities directly related to instruction.[subsumed
        by article 27]

E.B.   Secondary class teaching assignments shall not include classes requiring more than two
       (2) separate academic preparations or distinctly different lesson plans per day unless the
       teacher voluntarily accepts an additional preparation. [moved to artvcle 21]

F.C.   All assignments shall be established so that staff members have equivalent opportunities
       to teach subjects for which they are qualified.[moved to article 21]

G.D.   Teachers may leave at the close of the pupil day for good cause with the approval of the
       principal. [moved to article 27]

H.     Grading periods:

       1.      Except as it relates to graduating seniors, at least two (2) working days from the
               close of the grading period shall be allowed before grades are due. During the
               post-school period, the above requirement may be changed should special
               circumstances dictate.[moved to article 27]

       2.      The school calendar shall establish the end of each grading period. Said day shall
               be the day to which the above time applies.

I.     The Board agrees to Association involvement in the development of the school calendar.

J.     Teachers will be allowed to leave school on election days for purposes of voting provided
       they have no student responsibilities and provided they are registered voters in the
       municipality or area in which the election is to be held.[moved to article 27]

K.     It is a reasonable expectation that teachers will have up to ten (10) working days to enter
        graded assignments to the Digital gradebook. Extensions may be requested and granted
        by principals for sufficient reasons related to the employee’s health, leave status, students
        with makeup assignments or other extenuating circumstances. [revised to calendar days
        and moved to article 27]


                   ARTICLE 3938 SPECIALIZED CLINICAL SERVICES




                                                54
     1. Instructional personnel under this agreement and applicable law, includes not
        only classroom teachers, but also specialized clinical services who are
        responsible for advising students with regard to their abilities and aptitudes,
        educational and occupational opportunities, personal and social adjustments,
        providing placement services, performing educational evaluations and similar
        functions. This would include school psychologists, psychology department
        educational diagnosticians, speech –language pathologists, teachers of
        speech correction, occupational therapists, physical therapists and
        audiologists. The parties acknowledge and understand that the expertise and
        role of staff members within the specialized clinical services category differs
        from the expertise and role of classroom teachers. The parties also
        acknowledge and understand that the expertise and role of the staff members
        differ among the various categories of specialized clinical services personnel.

     2. It is the intent of the parties to examine each of these positions and make
        recommendations to determine whether the nature of the services performed
        and the expertise of each group warrants consideration of case load caps,
        additional planning, job descriptions, or alternative evaluations from the
        provisions generally described in this agreement. The parties agree that the
        Board will convene a committee to review these issues and make
        recommendations regarding the committee’s conclusions.                                        Formatted: Font: 11 pt, Font color: Black

                                                                                                      Formatted: List Paragraph, Space After: 0 pt, Line
     3. The committee will be comprised of equal representation of all effected parties.              spacing: single, No bullets or numbering, Adjust space
        Members of this committee will be appointed with equal numbers by PCSB and PCTA               between Latin and Asian text, Adjust space between
        from among the various specialties.                                                           Asian text and numbers




                                ARTICLE 40 39 EQUAL RIGHTS

The Board shall adopt policies to ensure equal rights to all teachers as per the Florida Education
Equity Act, Chapter 1000.05 F.S.



                            ARTICLE 41 40PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS

A.      Payroll deductions shall be made by the Board when authorization has been given by the
        teacher for insurance coverage, credit union, Workplace Giving Campaign, tax sheltered
        annuities, and UnionAssociation dues.

B.      All coverage shall be considered as continuous from year to year except where the recipient
        of the deductions allows otherwise.

C.      Any deduction shall be terminated through the recipient of the deduction according to the
        published policy of that recipient.




                                                55
D.     Union Association Deductions

       1.      Any teacher who is a member of the Union Association, or who has applied for
               membership, may sign and deliver to the Union Association an assignment
               authorizing deduction of membership dues in the Union Association. Such
               authorization shall continue in effect from year to year thereafter unless revoked in
               writing as prescribed by law. Pursuant to such authorization, the Board shall deduct
               such sum as authorized in equal biweekly payments from the teacher's regular
               salary check beginning with the salary check received by the teacher in the month
               following the date of authorization. The deductions shall be remitted not less
               frequently than biweekly to the UnionAssociation. Upon termination of a teacher's
               employment, the Board shall deduct all unpaid UnionAssociation dues from the
               remaining paycheck(s).

       2.      Annually during the month of June, the Association shall contribute to the Board of
               Education a sum equal to five cents (.05) for each member on payroll deduction.

       2.      The Union will be provided a biweekly file identifying instructional employees
               within the bargaining unit.
       3.      The parties agree to the ongoing provision of data services to the Association. Said
               services not to be in excess of those provided prior to the application of this
               Agreement without the approval of the Administration. The Association agrees to
               reimburse the Board for reasonable costs incurred in fulfillment of this provision.
               Consistent with Board policy, said services will be subject to reasonable restrictions
               on the availability of software and computer time.


            ARTICLE 42 41 USE OF PRE- AND POST-SCHOOL PLANNING TIME

Teachers shall be free to use the pre- and post-school planning time to prepare for the opening
and closing of the school year within their own school except as follows:

A.     At least one (1) hour shall be allotted for Union Association meetings.

B.     One (1) hour during post school may be scheduled by each faculty for a faculty social.

C.     Internal meetings shall be held to a minimum to allow maximum preparation time by
       teachers. In addition to the trade day option, twoOne days or four two half days during the
       pre-school period shall be designated as instructional excellence day and no meeting or
       activities will be scheduled by the Administration or Association. Should the pre-school
       period be reduced, this subsection will be readdressed by the parties.

D.     Teachers may be required to attend necessary countywide and school-based meetings.

E.     Teachers not attending any of the above functions shall be expected to be working in their
       own buildings.

F.     In twelve (12) month programs, special attention shall be paid to providing adequate pre-
        and post-school and pre- and post-grading period time. Board will review and implement




                                                56
        where feasible methods allowing teachers assigned to alternative schedules to participate
        in professional education activities.



                      ARTICLE 43 42 SCHEDULE OF SALARY PAYMENTS


A.      Teachers shall have the option to receive their salary on a ten (10) month or twelve (12)
        month basis.

B.      Except for the first and last paycheck, payment shall be made biweekly with the annual
        salary divided into equal payments, as close as possible, for the period of employment.
C.      Payment shall be made on the Friday following the end of a pay period. All personnel are
        paid by direct deposit.

D.      Any balance of the Board's contractual salary commitment shall be included in the last
        check of the year.

E.      Whenever negotiations are concluded after the start of the school year, the Board shall pay
        the accrued retroactive salary and then prorate the balance over the remaining pay periods.

F.      The parties agree to work cooperatively in the best interest of the employees and the system
        to resolve the conflicts arising from the payroll system.




                ARTICLE 44 43 PART-TIME TEACHERSJOB SHARING

     A. In rare instances it may be expedient to employ persons to teach in the regular school
        program for a few hours each day, or for a sporadic number of days which will be less than
        the total number of days in the school year. The standard net time for purposes of
        computing salary on a daily basis will be seven (7) hours per day.

     B. A teacher employed for three and a half (3 1/2) clock hours or less per day will be paid on
        the hourly schedule based on rank. Such person will not be eligible for sick leave nor for
        any other regular benefits.
     C. A teacher employed for more than three and a half (3 1/2) hours per day will be paid on a
        fractional basis, based on rank and experience, using seven (7) hours as the denominator.
        A person employed during a school year on a fractional basis equivalent to more than half
        the number of hours which a person teaching the full school day for one hundred ninety
        eight (198) days would teach, will be granted credit for a year of experience for such work.
        The teacher will therefore be eligible for sick leave according to state law. Employees who
        have been reduced from full-time contracts due to reduction in force to 4/7, 5/7 or 6/7
        contracts shall receive pro-rated benefits for a period not to exceed two school years.




                                                 57
         D. The Board and the Association agree to develop and maintain a "Job Sharing" program.             Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.25", No bullets or
         Annually, the parties shall identify a specific number of units which should be available for job   numbering
         sharing.


                       ARTICLE 45 44 SALARIES AND SALARY SUPPLEMENTS

     A. The Board and the Union will collaboratively negotiate salaries each year. There will be a
     Grandfathered Salary Schedule and a Performance Salary Schedule in accordance with s.
     1012.22 F.S. The 2018-2019 salary schedule for instructional staff The annual salary for
     members of this bargaining unit shall be set forth in Appendices _____A through ___.A2 as
     follows: It is understood that The these rates are for the established one hundred ninety eight
     (198) days, which is inclusive of six (6) paid holidays as determined in the Calendar Committee
     process. It is further understood that incremental steps on the salary schedule are subject to
     renegotiations every year and are not automatically payable until such time as a new salary
     schedule has been ratified. The 2015-2016 Grandfathered Salary Schedule includes one step
     advancement for all eligible teachers. Florida Statutes prohibits salary adjustments based on
     experience for teachers on the Performance Salary Schedule. Therefore, there is no step
     advancement on the Performance Salary Schedule.

             1.     B. The parties agree to continue a thorough reviewing of the salary schedule             Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", Hanging: 0.5", No
                    during 2015-2016 to begin adjusting the base schedule to reduce dependence on            bullets or numbering
                    the referendum supplement over time.

             A.     C.        Credit on the salary schedule shall be given in the amount set forth in this   Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", No bullets or
             Agreement. Any teacher completing more than one-half (1/2) of a year (99 days) shall be
             granted a full year's placement on the schedule. Current employees seeking long-term
             leaves must complete ninety- six (96) days of service in order to be granted a full year's
             placement on the schedule.

B.   Personnel appointed by the Board shall be issued contracts for a period not to exceed one
     hundred ninety eight (198) days except under the following conditions: [language below deleted
     or moved to article 36]

     1       Regular full-time post-secondary vocational instructors shall receive contracts for two
             hundred thirty five (235) days of service except for temporary appointments. Such
             contracts shall be based on curricular and program needs for specific instructional areas
             and shall be contingent upon sufficient student enrollment as determined by accepted
             staffing ratios and shall not be for less than one hundred ninety eight (198) days. In the
             event that student enrollment is insufficient to warrant two hundred thirty five (235) days
             of continuous service, the number of days may be reduced by administration using as the
             criteria: needs of the program, certification, qualification, and seniority in the district.

     A teacher on a two hundred thirty five (235) day contract who has taught ten (10) continuous
            years shall be permitted to return to one hundred ninety eight (198) day contract once
            every five (5) years for personal or professional reason provided that adequate coverage
            is obtained. No more than three percent (3%) of the instructional staff in that school
            center shall be granted such leave during any school year. However, upon appropriate




                                                      58
       justification and approval by the director and the Chief Operating Officer/PTEC, a
       vocational teacher holding a two hundred thirty five (235) day contract may be granted a
       one hundred ninety eight (198) day contract for a period not to exceed one (1) academic
       year. Such alteration of contract shall be contingent upon the availability of qualified
       instructors to replace the teacher and the ability of the center to provide adequate
       coverage of necessary program material. It shall be the responsibility of the director to
       establish limits on the number of employees to be approved under this provision.
C.     Full-time instructors whose two hundred thirty five (235) day contract commences July 1
       will receive the new rate of pay effective that date. Similarly, all periods of additional duty,
       exclusive of summer school employment, which commence on July 1 or which continue
       beyond that date shall be compensated at a proration of the daily rate of the employee for
       hours worked retroactive to July 1. Under both circumstances, for an employee to receive
       retroactive compensation, he/she must be in active pay status on the date this Agreement
       is ratified. [moved to article 36]

D.     Summer school teachers shall be paid their hourly base rate of pay which was paid during
       the prior school year according to the teacher salary schedule for that year. There shall
       be no retroactive adjustment to summer school teaching salaries. [moved to 48]

F.     The Board agrees that the unique nature of certain programs requires additional time and
       resources. Consequently, when circumstances dictate the need, additional duty contracts
       may be granted to designated personnel.

       G.      D.      Credit for channels on the salary schedule shall be granted on the basis of        Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", No bullets or
       earned degrees from accredited institutions, appropriate vocational certification, and
       approved college credit which may be applied toward a degree or contribute to teacher
       effectiveness. A committee composed of an equal number of teachers appointed by the
       Association and administrators shall develop criteria and hear appeals to level placement.
       An hour is defined as one (1) semester hour. A quarter hour is 2/3 of a semester hour. In
       converting quarter hours to semester hours, fractions will be rounded to the nearest whole
       number.

H.      Supplements shall be paid in the manner set forth in the District Compensation Manual.
The parties agree to a thorough review of Supplemental Salary positions and pay during the 2015-
2016 year to make recommendations to the bargaining teams including a comparative analysis of
duties, functions, time, student numbers, risk or other factors determined to be relevant and
recommended supplemental salaries in time to include such recommendations in negotiations over
salary for the 2016-2017 school year.

I.     Summer school will be paid in the amount set forth in Appendix B.[moved to 48]

J.      E.       The Association and the Board mutually agree that henceforth, any oral or written        Formatted: No bullets or numbering
agreement made by an employee of the Board, including administrators, concerning any term or
condition of employment or compensation, that may conflict with or be inconsistent in any way
with the collective bargaining agreement, policies, procedures, laws or applicable regulations
including adopted salary schedules, shall be given no effect nor form the basis for any claim
whatsoever against the Board.




                                                 59
                                     ARTICLE 46 SUMMER PROGRAM

     The summer salary schedule shall apply to all teachers appointed to summer programs such as
     summer enrichment, summer academic school, summer reading, etc. Payment shall be for
     periods established by the Board for the operation of such extended programs. Personnel
     assigned to the summer program shall receive all benefits provided by this contract. [moved to
     48]


                ARTICLE 46745 CREDIT FOR PRIOR SERVICE ON SALARY SCHEDULE

A.   A.     Except for instructional personnel rehired following completion of the DROP program or
     those re-employed who are receiving benefits from the Florida Retirement System (FRS), Ccredit
     on the instructional salary schedule will be granted for all verified public school experience in
     accordance with state law. Instructional personnel rehired following completion of DROP or those
     re-employed who are receiving benefits from the Florida Retirement System, shall be provided
     experience consistent with Section B. below.

     B.      Teachers who are extended or rehired after completing the DROP program and those who              Formatted: No bullets or numbering
     are re-employed following retirement from FRS, shall be entitled to a maximum of eight (8) years
     of experience on the salary schedule. Where teachers have less than eight (8) years of Florida
     experience, "out-of-county" experience may be combined to a maximum of eight (8) years of credit.
     The term "out-of-county" includes full-time teaching experience outside Pinellas County, full-time
     private school teaching experience and related work experience as provided for in this contract. No
     additional "out-of-county" experience is allowed to teachers who have eight (8) or more years
     Florida teaching experience.

     C.      B.      A maximum of three (3) years of credit is allowed for service in the armed forces of
     the United States subsequent to January 1, 1940.such credit to be included in the maximum of
     eight (8) years allowed for "out-of-county" credit.

     D.      C.      Full-time vocational and/or technical shop and technical laboratory instructors,
     related instructors, cooperative coordinators, vocational business teachers, DCT teachers, and
     other related members of the unit will receive credit for each year required for certification. One (1)
     year for each year or major fraction thereof spent full-time in the occupation is acceptable up to a
     maximum of six (6) years. Should a teacher change positions and no longer occupy a fulltime unit,
     he/she will lose all previously granted work experience. An employee involuntarily reassigned from
     a position which provided work experience credit shall be allowed to maintain his/her present step
     on the salary schedule until such time as the schedule equals actual experience or until the
     employee returns to a vocational position, whichever comes first. Should an employee be offered
     reinstatement to a position that warrants work experience credit and the employee declines
     placement, the employee's salary shall be adjusted as if it were a voluntary assignment.

     E.     Former Pinellas County teachers who re-enter teaching service will receive credit for all
            teaching experience previously granted. This provision shall not apply to instructional
            personnel extended or rehired after completion of DROP or those receiving benefits from




                                                       60
        the Florida Retirement System.

F.     D.       Hourly and/or part-time teaching experience in Pinellas County schools, shall be           Formatted: No bullets or numbering
allowed to teachers who subsequently are employed as regular full-time teachers. One (1) year of
experience will be allowed for each fiscal year in which a teacher accrues at least nine hundred
(900) hours. Such experience will be in addition to out-of-county, military, and related work
experience as prescribed above.

G.      E.       Long-term substitute teaching experience is allowed to teachers who hold
Bachelor’s degrees and are subsequently employed as regular full-time teachers. Long-term
substitute teaching experience completed within three (3) years prior to accepting full-time
assignment, as a regular full-time teacher shall be granted. One (1) year of experience will be
allowed for each fiscal year in which a teacher accrues more than one-half (1/2) the number of days
in service in place of the same teacher. The number of days will be 100 days for a ten (10) month
teacher.

H.     F.      The parties may grant additional years of experience for related work experience
or supplemental one (1) year compensation when mutually agreed to by the parties. Such
determinations shall be considered pre-employment conditions or shall address salary equity
questions.

I.    G.     The Board and the Association agree to provide related work experience credit to
employees whose service prior to employment meets the following criteria:

        1.      The work experience must have been in an area substantially similar to that which
                the employee is expected to perform.

        2.      The work experience must have been in a position which normally requires a
                baccalaureate or a technologically advanced level of training.

        3.      Annually, the parties shall identify a maximum number of years to be granted and
                the specific areas in which such credit shall be allowed.

       H. Credit for prior service or for transfer of accrued sick leave shall only be given               Formatted: No bullets or numbering, Tab stops: Not
prospectively from the date the employee requests, in writing, verification of such service. All           at 0.97"
adjustments shall be made from the date of verification forward.


                ARTICLE 47 46 PINELLAS VIRTUAL INSTRUCTION PROGRAM

The Board and the Union agree that Virtual School Instructional Programs provide a vital
alternative to traditional classroom instruction. To meet the requirements of state law regarding
virtual instruction and to fulfill student course requests, the District will hire teachers to instruct,
monitor, evaluate and support student progress in its virtual instruction program known as
Pinellas Virtual School (PVS). Teachers may be hired full-time or on a part-time adjunct basis as
needed.




                                                   61
Teachers accepting a virtual school assignment understand that teaching through online and
distance learning technology provides greater flexibility in their daily schedules, but also requires
a commitment to professionalism. Teachers are responsible to deliver content, hold regular office
hours and communicate with PVS stakeholders. PVS teachers are “teachers” as defined by
Article 3 and have the rights, privileges and obligations agreed to by the parties. They are
expected to work each week as scheduled in a productive capacity that focuses on the learning
and the well-being of students.

To the extent that the superintendent elects to utilize the curriculum of Florida Virtual School or
other such providers, the teacher must comply, at a minimum, with the expectations of such
provider. Teachers assigned to deliver the curriculum supplied by such provider, understand that
their role is to facilitate, monitor and support student progress. They are not required to create
the content.

The Board and the Association will meet annually to discuss the implementation of the Virtual
Instruction Program.


Full-Time Virtual Teachers

Schedule and Availability:

1.    Teachers will work 37.5 hours per week and must be available to students by phone, text,
      video conferencing or email. Teachers will keep regular daily office hours that allow for
      students to contact them and may elect to flex their hours as needed to meet the needs of
      the students. Teachers have the option to work 37.5 hours within a seven day work week
      provided it does not adversely affect the students’ schedules. Teachers must post on-line
      information describing: 1) a schedule of their office hours and 2) that it is an expectation
      and requirement of the course that the student and teacher maintain regular contact.

2.    Teachers will not be assigned more than five distinctly different courses. Multiple levels of
      the same course content, such as English and English honors, are not “distinctly different
      courses.”

3.    Teachers will maintain a log, available upon request, describing the date and time of the
      work performed, the specific tasks performed, and the time spent on each task, including
      detail such as the courses worked on, and the names of the students and or completion per
      semester.

4.    Initial enrollment and registration of students will not be the teacher’s
      responsibility.


Part-Time Adjunct Positions:


1.    Teachers will be paid an initial supplement of $2,000 for up to 45 student semester
      enrollments. In addition, teachers will receive $50 per successful student completion per




                                                  62
       semester. A successful student completion occurs when a student completes a course with
       grade of “A”, “B”, “C”, or “D”. Because this supplement was initially negotiated when adjunct
       teachers developed the curriculum whereas the Florida Virtual School curriculum is
       currently being used, the parties agree to reconsider the amounts paid at the end of the
       2018-2019 academic year following a review of the feasibility of the program.

2.     After being selected as an adjunct virtual school teacher, but prior to being assigned his/her
       first virtual class, each teacher must complete an online training program. Teachers will be
       able to complete the online training pre-requisite at their convenience. The District will
       provide the after hour staff development rate for scheduled live training sessions.

3.     Teachers will be required to have a publishable telephone number and a computer with
       high-speed internet access. School facilities and equipment may be utilized to the extent
       that they are normally available and a teacher’s regular work responsibilities may not be
       disrupted.

4.     Teachers will be expected to establish weekly “office hours” during which students and
       parents will be able to communicate with the teacher via telephone. In general, at least five
       (5) hours of “office hours” should be scheduled each week of instruction. These hours will
       be set at the teacher’s discretion. Additional student and parent contact may be required
       beyond the teacher’s established “office hours” and can be conducted in the time, place
       and manner agreed upon by the teacher and the student or parent.

5.     In general, teachers will be expected to return student and parent communication and
       acknowledge receipt of student work within twenty-four (24) hours of the contact being
       initiated.

6.    Student enrollment will be capped at forty-five (45) for each semester course, with the goal
      of obtaining thirty (30) successful completions per teacher per semester. Additional student
      enrollments beyond the forty-five (45) student cap may be permitted upon mutual
      agreement by the District and teacher.

7.     Teachers will not be assigned more than two (2) virtual instruction courses per semester.
       Additional courses may be permitted upon mutual agreement by the District and teacher.

8.     Initial enrollment and registration of students will not be the teacher’s responsibility.

                                            ARTICLE 4847
                                                                                                          Formatted: Indent: Left: -1.2", Hanging: 1.35", No
           Additional Compensation for Summer Programs, Extended Learning Programs,                       bullets or numbering
                   Career Technical and Adult Education Center Programs
                                                                                                          Formatted: No bullets or numbering
                                      OTHER COMPENSATION
                                                                                                          Formatted: Left
     1. The hourly rate for summer school shall be the teacher’s hourly rate. The Board currently
        operates a summer program known as Summer Bridge. Teachers selected to teach in
        Summer Bridge will be paid their base hourly rate paid in the prior school year. There will
        be no retroactive adjustment to summer school teaching salaries. [from article 45 and
        appendix B]

     2. Positions for Summer Bridge will be offered first to Pinellas county teachers who are
        qualified for the position. In filling such positions, quality of performance, past experience,
        attendance records, the minor and major fields of study, shall be criteria for selection.




                                                   63
         [from article 24]
                                                                                                            Formatted: Indent: Left: 0.5", No bullets or
     3. Employment practices for Summer Bridge shall be fairly applied. Upon request, a teacher             numbering
        denied a position for Summer Bridge shall be given good and sufficient reason. [from
        article 24]


     4. The hourly rate to be paid to teachers, who work with students in programs known as
        Extended Learning Programs (ELP’s), shall be twenty dollars ($20) per hour for the 2013-
        2014 school year. Such payment shall be retroactive to July 1, 2013. Beginning with the
        2014-2015 school year, the hourly rate of pay for ELP teachers will equal the teacher’s
        base hourly rate (which excludes referendum) up to a maximum of twenty nine ($29)
        dollars per hour. The parties agree that the term “ELP” encompasses a broad range of
        school programs. The Board may establish programs known as Extended Learning
        Programs (ELP’s) at various schools. The parties agree that the term “ELP” encompasses
        a broad range of school programs but expressly recognize that they are to be treated
        differently than Career, Technical and Adult Education (CTAE) enrichment or
        remediation programs. The hourly rate of pay for ELP teachers will equal the teacher’s
        base hourly rate (which excludes referendum) up to a maximum of twenty nine ($29)
        dollars per hour.

     2.5. Beginning September 28, 2013, Tteachers who are offered non-student contact work
          beyond their regular contractual day shall be paid twenty ($20) dollars per hour to perform
          work writing or adapting curriculum, working on school improvement initiatives as outlined
          in school improvement plans approved by the district, or working on grant-related activities
          as outlined in district-approved grants.

     3.6. The hourly rate to be paid to teachers who work at the Career, Technical and Adult
          Education (CTAE) centers or in programs advertised as CTAE programs and funded
          through work force funding, will be paid in addition to their employment as a full time
          teacher shall be twenty- -four ($240) dollars per hour. for the 2013-2014 school year. Such
          payment shall be retroactive to July 1, 2013. However, teachers who are assigned to teach
          high skill/high wage or performance - earning CTAE funded programs or critical need areas
          that require highly specialized skills or expertise such as registered nurses, will continue to
          be paid with a range of $240 to $30 dollars per hour.

     4.7. Junior Reserve Officer Training Corp. (JROTC) instructors shall have the option of being
          paid according to the military pay formula or this salary schedule.


                                 ARTICLE 4948 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS

A.      Benefit Program - The Board agrees to provide a comprehensive benefits program to
        include but not limited to health, dental, life, vision, accidental death and dismemberment
        and income protection insurance. Health Care Reimbursement and Dependent Day Care
        Reimbursement Accounts are also provided. The amount of board contribution and
        employee deductions will be determined annually through the bargaining process.




                                                   64
     The Board will pay approximately 80% of the annual health insurance premium for the
     duration of this agreement. Individual amounts will vary based on the plan selected.

B.   Section 125 Cafeteria Plan - The Board agrees to provide a Cafeteria Plan with a premium
     conversion option, which enables employees to pay their portion of most insurance
     premiums on a pre-tax basis. Enrollment in the Flex Plan is automatic for eligible
     employees and participation continues from year to year, unless the risk management and
     insurance department is notified by the employee in writing to cancel participation. The
     cancellation request must be received by the department within thirty (30) days of a
     qualifying life event or during the annual open enrollment period.

C.   Premium payments for insurance coverage are deducted from the employee’s gross salary
     before taxes are taken. Because FLEX is considered by IRS as a salary reduction plan
     elections may only be made annually. Employees may not change their election during the
     calendar year unless a change in family status occurs. The IRS defines a change in family
     status as: marriage, death, divorce, birth, adoption, loss or gain of spouse or dependent’s
     employment, loss of plan eligibility, change of residence or work, entitlement to Medicare
     or Medicaid, or a judgment decree or court order requiring coverage of dependents.
     Regulations for salary reduction are independent from insurance carrier provisions for
     change in coverage.

     Eligibility - Regular employees who work at least thirty (30) hours per week, job-share
     employees and employees who work two (2) part time regular jobs totaling more than thirty
     (30) hours per week are eligible for benefits. Dependent eligibility guidelines will be in
     accordance with provisions outlined in the Beneflex Guide.

D.   Enrollment:

     Initial Enrollment - Enrollment and change forms are due in the risk management and
     insurance department within thirty (30) calendar days of hire or change of eligibility status.
     Coverage becomes effective the first day of the month following sixty (60) days of
     employment or change of eligibility status.

     Open Enrollment: The Board provides an annual enrollment period during which an
     employee may add, cancel, or change coverage.

E.   Changes in Coverage - In accordance with IRS guidelines and carrier contracts, employees
     may make certain changes during the plan year if a change in family status occurs. A
     completed Enrollment & Change Form and supporting documentation must be received by
     Risk Management within thirty (30) days of the qualifying event. The change in coverage
     will be effective the first of the month following the qualifying event and receipt of the
     enrollment form by risk management.

F.   Termination of Coverage - Insurance coverage ends the last day of the month in which an
     employee no longer meets eligibility requirements, retires, terminates employment or fails
     to pay the required premiums when due.




                                              65
G.   Basic Board Life - The Board shall provide, to eligible employees, group term life insurance
     in the amount of one (1) times annual salary rounded up to the next one thousand dollars
     ($1,000) with a minimum amount of $15,000.

H.   Board Contribution - Recognizing the importance of stabilizing the health insurance rates
     and expanding the number of persons participating in the group health insurance programs,
     the parties agree to continue a plan of variable Board contributions and to minimize the
     adverse impact of annual health insurance premium increases.

     The Board contributes toward the cost of employee benefits each pay period September
     through June when a Board issued paycheck is received (not to exceed twenty (20)
     contributions per calendar year) In any period during which a paycheck is not earned, the
     employee will owe both the Board contribution amount and normal insurance deductions.
     Board contribution amounts vary and are negotiated annually.

     When an employee chooses health insurance coverage, the Board contribution amount is
     automatically credited toward the per-pay-period health insurance premium.

     No-Health Option: If an employee does not select health insurance coverage, the employee
     may apply the predetermined “No-Health Board contribution” toward the purchase of certain
     supplemental insurance benefits. The parties agree to provide benefits eligible employees
     who do not elect health insurance up to $ 75.00 a pay period in flex credits to be used to
     purchase supplemental benefits including Dental, Vision, AD & D, Short-Term and Long-
     Term Disability, the Hospital Confinement Plan and the Health Care Reimbursement
     Account (HCRA). The maximum amount of board provided flex credits elections into the
     HCRA may not exceed $25 a pay period and the minimum election amount may not be less
     than $5.00.

     Funds deposited into the HCRA will be administered in accordance with IRS guidelines and
     the district’s administrative procedures governing its Flex plan. The maximum amount that
     the district will contribute annually to the HCRA is $500. Any unused flex credits will be
     forfeited. Due to the monthly administration fee, a minimum of $5.00 per pay has been
     established. Employees may not use these credits to purchase Optional Employee or
     Dependent term life or apply toward the dependent care reimbursement accounts or
     MetLife Voluntary products. Board contribution is not cumulative and Board contribution not
     used is forfeited.

     Eligible married Board employees, both working for the District, who wish to be covered by
     the same health insurance plan and have at least one additional dependent (total of three
     persons), may select the Two (2) Board family option.

I.   Insurance Deductions - Premiums for insurance plans are due in advance; therefore
     deductions begin the month before the insurance effective date. Deductions are taken over
     twenty (20) pay periods with no scheduled deductions taken in the summer. In the event
     that an employee's coverage in any insurance plan is effective after January 1 or if a change
     in coverage occurs due to a change in family status, the employee's payroll deduction will




                                              66
     be adjusted to insure that adequate premiums have been collected.

     For all insurance programs, payment of premiums does not guarantee that coverage is in
     effect. Coverage and eligibility are determined by the insurance contract and the policies
     and procedures of the Risk Management Department. If premiums are collected in error, a
     refund will be issued. In the event of a discrepancy in coverage, Risk Management records
     are determinative, unless the employee can provide a copy of an approved enrollment form
     to the contrary. Enrollment in a Board benefit plan authorizes the Board to payroll-deduct
     any and all required insurance premium(s). Employee rates are reflected in the Beneflex
     Guides.

J.   Waiver of Health Insurance Premium - An employee on an approved leave of absence who
     cannot work because of total disability and has used all available sick leave and vacation
     time may apply for waiver of his/her health insurance premium. Employees must apply for
     the waiver within thirty (30) days of the date of eligibility notification from the risk
     management and insurance department. Waiver of premium (total cost of health insurance)
     will begin 90 days from the beginning of his/her disability and after exhaustion of FMLA,
     whichever is later, and will be considered while on an approved leave through Personnel.
     Waiver of premium documentation must be submitted at least every six (6) months or upon
     request. Failure to provide this documentation will result in cancellation of the waiver of
     premium option.

K.   Payment of Insurance While on Leave - While on an approved, non-FMLA, unpaid leave of
     absence, employees are required to pay the entire cost of all insurance plans, including
     Board paid life insurance in order for coverage to continue. Payment must be received by
     the risk management and insurance department by the first of each month. Insurance
     coverage will be canceled for nonpayment if full payment is not received by the due date.
     When an employee is on an approved Family Medical Leave (FMLA), the employee is
     responsible only for payment of the portion of premium(s) the employee normally pays.
     Nonpayment of premiums will result in cancellation of coverage.

L.   Payment of Insurance While Suspended Without Pay - While on suspension without pay,
     an employee is considered to be on unpaid leave of absence. As such, the employee is
     entitled to maintain insurance coverage by paying the total cost of insurance. If the
     employee elects to continue insurance and is reinstated, the employee will be refunded the
     Board contribution paid during the period of suspension. If the employee elects to continue
     insurance and is not reinstated, the insurance will terminate the last day of the month in
     which the employee is dismissed. If the employee chooses not to continue insurance and
     is reinstated, insurance will be reinstated the first of the month following the date of the final
     order and the employee will be responsible for any regular employee contribution.

M.   Retiree Insurance - An employee who retires with six (6) or more years of service and elects
     to receive a state retirement check or retirees under the FRS investment plan with thirty
     (30) or more years of service may participate in the retiree insurance program. Benefit
     election must be made within thirty (30) days of the effective date of retirement. Employees
     who do not enroll at retirement shall be ineligible for future participation in the Board retiree
     insurance program. Retirees may only continue the health insurance in effect at the time
     of retirement. Basic board provided life insurance benefits may be continued or decreased




                                                67
        but may not be increased. Life insurance benefits are subject to age reduction formulas as
        determined by the carrier. Retirees may also maintain dental coverage only as allowed by
        the provider and may also maintain coverage in the vision plan. Accidental death and
        dismemberment and Optional term life insurance benefits may be continued as an
        individual contract subject to insurance company procedures. Income protection coverage
        ends upon retirement. Retirees may make changes in coverage in accordance with carrier
        guidelines.

N.     Employee Assistance Program - The Board provides an Employee Assistance Plan (EAP)
       to all part and full-time employees, retirees, and family members living with an employee
       or retiree. Employees, retirees and family members may utilize the EAP even if they are
       not enrolled in the Board health plan. Participation in the EAP is voluntary and all records
       and discussions with the EAP are confidential.

O.     Voluntary Retirement Programs - Pinellas County Schools provides eligible employees an
       optional 403(b), 457 and Roth deferred compensation programs. The Board is not
       responsible for the actions of nor recommends any company or investment product.
       Contributions must be made through payroll deduction and therefore are considered a
       salary reduction. Change requests must be in writing on the appropriate form to the
       attention of Risk Management & Insurance.

P.     Workers’ Compensation - The Board provides Workers’ Compensation benefits pursuant
       to Florida Statute, Chapter 440. Workers’ Compensation indemnity benefits paid in
       combination with an employee’s sick leave or vacation time shall not exceed the
       employee’s bi-weekly salary. Whenever possible the Board will provide for up to ninety (90)
       days, light or modified duty for any employee returning to work after a job-related injury.
       Reasonable accommodations will be made in accordance with restrictions of the authorized
       treating physician. The employee is required to report for work on the day indicated by the
       authorized treating physician.

Q.     Employee Benefit Guidelines - All other provisions regulating group benefits shall be
       governed by the policies and procedures of the Risk Management Department, insurance
       contracts, and this Agreement.

R.     Dental Coverage - The Board will contribute towards the cost of optional dental coverage.
       The annual amount will be determined through the bargaining process.

S.     Vision Coverage -The Board will provide Employee Only vision coverage to all benefit
       eligible employees at no cost (employees must enroll). Employees may elect to cover a
       spouse and/or dependents through voluntary payroll deduction or flex credits.

        Employee Benefit Guidelines - All other provisions regulating group benefits shall be
governed by the policies and procedures of the Risk Management Department, insurance
contracts, and this Agreement.


                         ARTICLE 50 49 DIFFERENTIATED SUPPORT




                                                68
        Pursuant to the Memorandum of Understanding required by Section 1001.42, F.S.,
the parties agreed to the following levels of support and related requirements for schools
based on the school grades assigned by the Florida Department of Education (FLDOE).


Designation of School Category

  1.        Levels of support to schools will be based on the school’s designation as either a
            Tier I, Tier II, Tier III or Tier IV School which in turn will be based on the school
            grade assigned by the FLDOE. Section 1001.42(21) F.S., requires the School
            Board to declare an educational emergency for all Tier III and Tier IV Schools
            as defined herein. Once a school is assigned a grade, typically in July of each
            year, the school will automatically be classified in one of the following four
            categories for the school year immediately following the assignment of the school
            grade:


   Tier I

        a)      A Tier I School is any school not designated as a Tier II, Tier III or Tier IV
                school.


   Tier II

        b)      A Tier II School is any school identified by the District as requiring additional
                support to prevent it from receiving a school grade of “D” or “F”. Only schools
                receiving a low “C” (meaning any school within three percentage points of a D--
                i.e. schools receiving 41% to 43% of total possible points) may be identified by
                the District. Additionally, a Tier II School automatically includes any school that
                is assigned a grade of “C” or above but received a grade of “D” or “F” for the
                prior year. For the 2018-2019 school year, the following schools are Tier II
                schools:


                 1. Azalea Middle                            C 17/18, F 16/17, D 15/16
                 2. Bear Creek Elementary                    C 17/18, A 16/17
                 3. Dunedin Elementary                       C 17/18, C 16/17
                 4. Eisenhower Elementary                    C 17/18, C 16/17
                 5. Fuguitt Elementary                       C 17/18, B 16/17
                 6. Largo Middle School                      C 17/18, D 16/17, D 15/16
                 7. Lealman Avenue Elementary                C 17/18, C 16/17, C 15/16
                 8. McMullen Booth Elementary                C 17/18, C 16/17
                 9. Mildred Helms Elementary                 C 17/18, D16/17, D 15/16
                 10. Seventy-Fourth Street                   C17/18, C 16/17
                 11. Sexton Elementary                       C 17/18, D 16/17, C 15/16
                 12. Woodlawn Elementary                     C 17/18, C 16/17, C 15/16

   Tier III

        c)      A Tier III School is any school assigned a grade of “D” or “F” but did not
                receive a grade of “D” or “F” the preceding year. The following schools are
                classified as Tier III schools for the 2018-2019 school year:




                                                 69
               1.   Bay Point Elementary                   D 17/18, C 16/17, C 15/16
               2.   Gulfport Elementary                    D 17/18, C16/17
               3.   John Hopkins Middle School             D 17/18, C 16/17, D 15/16
               4.   Meadowlawn Middle School               D17/18, C 16/17, C 15/16
               5.   New Heights Elementary                 D 17/18, C 16/17, C 16/17
               6.   Pinellas Park Elementary               D17/18, C 16/17, C 16/17
               7.   Ponce De Leon Elementary               F 17/18, C 16/17, C 15/16                Formatted: Spanish (United States)

     Tier IV

        d)     Tier IV Schools are the former “Scale Up” schools as well as any school
               assigned a grade of “D” or “F” for two consecutive years.

               1.     Campbell Park Elementary           F 17/18, C 16/17, F 15/16
               2.     Fairmount Park Elementary          D 17/18, F 16/17, D 15/16
               3.     Lakewood Elementary                F 17/18, D 16/17, D 15/16
               4.     Maximo Elementary                  C17/18, D 16/17, C 15/16                   Formatted: Spanish (United States)
               5.     Melrose Elementary                 C 17/18, C 16/17, F 15/16
               6.     Midtown Academy                    F 17/18, F 16/17
               7.     Sandy Lane Elementary              D 17/18, D 16/17, C 15/16

       Levels of Support for Schools---Additional Planning and Extended Day

2.     Section1001.42(21) F.S. requires the School Board to declare an educational
       emergency for all schools receiving a grade of “D” or “F” and further provides for
       the immediate implementation of district managed turnaround plans for approval
       by the state board. In addition to supports provided in the district managed
       turnaround plans, additional planning is a critical strategy necessary to improve
       student achievement. Accordingly, the parties agree to add time for additional structured
       planning at Tier II, Tier III and Tier IV schools. The term “structured planning” may
       consist of “common planning time,” “collaborative planning,” “lesson study,” “data chats,”
       “coaching” and other standards based planning methods as defined in Rule 6A-1.099811
       F.A.C. and Article 27 and specifically excludes Uninterrupted Planning Time as defined in
       Article 27, unless otherwise specifically stated herein.


3.     The amount of the additional planning depends on the level of support required at each of
       the Tiers. The term “classroom teachers” is understood to mean, in elementary schools,
       regular full time kindergarten through fifth grade classroom teachers, instructional
       coaches, and self –contained exceptional student education teachers, VE resource
       teachers, and ESOL teachers. In secondary, the term is understood to mean regular full-
       time teachers in the following core subjects—language arts, reading, math, science,
       social studies, instructional coaches and self –contained exceptional student education
       teachers, VE resource teachers, and ESOL teachers. It is also understood that the
       planning called for hereunder is in addition to structured planning already contemplated
       by Article 27 and that this provision describing additional planning supersedes any
       limitation on structured planning or mandatory meetings under Article 27.


Tier II




                                               70
4.   Principals at Tier Il schools will extend the Teacher Contractual Day by forty- five minutes
     one time per week for classroom teachers to engage in additional structured planning.
     The Principal and faculty will work collaboratively to establish a suitable schedule for the
     additional forty-five minutes per week for classroom teachers.

5.   Classroom Teachers at Tier II schools with an extended day will be paid their base hourly
     rate (exclusive of referendum) for the additional forty-five minutes added to the Teacher
     Contractual Day.


     Tier III

6.   Principals at Tier IIl schools will extend the Teacher Contractual Day by forty- five minutes
     one time per week for classroom teachers to engage in additional structured planning.
     The Principal and faculty will work collaboratively to establish a suitable schedule for the
     additional forty-five minutes per week for classroom teachers.

7.   Classroom Teachers at Tier III schools with an extended day will be paid their base hourly
     rate (exclusive of referendum) for the additional forty-five minutes added to the Teacher
     Contractual Day.




                                              71
 Tier IV

 8.    The Teacher Contractual Day is nine (9) hours. Beginning with the 2018-2019 school
       year, the Student Instructional Day at Tier IV elementary schools (and Midtown Academy)
       will be 7.25 hours. The seventy- five minutes (1.25 hours) per week will be used to add an
       additional forty-five minutes (45) of structured planning per week and an additional thirty
       (30) minutes of Uninterrupted Planning Time per week for classroom teachers. The 1.25
       hours per week is over and above the structured and uninterrupted planning incorporated
       in the schedule. The Principal and faculty will work collaboratively to establish a suitable
       schedule for the additional forty-five minutes per week for classroom teachers.

  9.   Beginning with the 2018-2019 school year, Principals at Tier IV secondary schools on an
       eight (8) period A/B block will extend the Teacher Contractual Day by forty- five minutes
       one time per week for classroom teachers to engage in additional structured planning.
       The Principal and faculty will work collaboratively to establish a suitable schedule for the
       additional forty-five minutes per week for classroom teachers.

  10. Instructional staff at Tier IV schools with an extended day will be paid their base hourly
      rate (exclusive of referendum) for the additional time added to the Teacher Contractual
      Day.


Transfer to or From Tier III or Tier IV School;

  11. Any teacher in the District may apply for a vacant position at any Tier III or Tier IV School at
      any time during the school year, notwithstanding any timeline established for a
      transfer process.

  12. Retention of teachers at a Tier III or Tier IV School is within the discretion of the principal.
      Principals will be encouraged to retain teachers who receive a rating of Highly Effective or
      Effective. If the principal decides that the teacher is not to be retained, the teacher will be
      referred to as a “transfer” the same as any teacher who elects to transfer and may
      participate in the voluntary or involuntary transfer periods. If the teacher does not find a
      new position, the District will place them. A teacher who is transferred under this
      provision, may submit a written request for a meeting to the Assistant Superintendent for
      Human Resources who will schedule a meeting with the Area Superintendent, the teacher
      and his/her representative. The principal and other staff called upon by the Assistant
      Superintendent for Human Resources will also be present at the meeting. The principal
      will explain the basis upon which the decision not to retain the teacher was made. The
      Area Superintendent and the Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources will
      determine the appropriateness of the principal’s decision. Such determination shall be in
      their sole discretion and shall not require just cause. There shall be no appeal from or
      challenge to their decision nor shall it constitute a basis for grievance.

  13. Prior to the dates established for the voluntary or involuntary transfer deadlines,
      teachers may notify their principal of their decision to transfer out of the Tier III or
      Tier IV School for the following year. A person who is transferred under this
      provision may participate in the voluntary or involuntary transfer periods. If the teacher
      does not find a new position, the District will place them prior to the start of the new
      school year.

  14. If a school drops from a Tier I or Tier II School to a Tier III school, additional transfer
      rights are triggered as a result of such change. If a teacher decides that they are unable




                                                 72
    to work any additional time required of a Tier III School, they must notify the principal by
    the third contract day of the school year and the principal will either effectuate an
    immediate transfer of the teacher or will relieve the teacher of the requirement to work
    any extended hours until such time as the principal is reasonably able to effectuate the
    transfer. If the principal determines that such grade change necessitates a change in
    staff at the school (and principals are encouraged to retain teachers who receive a rating
    of Highly Effective or Effective), the principal will notify the effected teacher as soon as
    possible and no later than the third contract day of the school year. If the principal decides
    that the teacher is not to be retained under this provision, they will be placed in a position
    at a different school. A teacher who is transferred under this provision, may submit a
    written request for a meeting to the Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources who
    will schedule a meeting with the Area Superintendent, the teacher and his/her
    representative. The principal and other staff called upon by the Assistant Superintendent
    for Human Resources will also be present at the meeting. The principal will explain the
    basis upon which the decision not to retain the teacher was made. The Area
    Superintendent and the Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources will determine
    the appropriateness of the principal’s decision. Such determination shall be in their sole
    discretion and shall not require just cause. There shall be no appeal from or challenge to
    their decision nor shall it constitute a basis for grievance.

Recruitment, Retention and Performance Bonuses for Tier III or Tier IV Schools

15. Except for the “grandfather provisions” described below which end after the 2018-2019
    school year, teachers working at a Tier III or Tier IV School will receive a bonus of $3,000
    if they are recruited to or retained at the Tier III or Tier IV School and work there for the
    school year for which they were hired. The full amount of the bonus will be paid for
    teachers who work the full school year and those who work less than the full school year
    will receive a prorated amount. A teacher is not eligible for both a recruitment and
    retention bonus.

16. When a Tier III or Tier IV School earns a grade of “C” or above, the school ceases to be a
    Tier III or Tier IV School and recruitment and retention bonuses end immediately. The
    teachers at the Tier III or Tier IV School are nevertheless entitled to receive the
    performance bonus described below for accomplishing the improvement in school grade.

17. When the grade assigned to a Tier III or Tier IV School improves to C or better, a teacher
    who worked at the school that year will receive a performance bonus equal to $1,500. If
    the grade assigned to a Tier III or Tier IV School improves by two letter grades, the
    teacher who worked at the school that year will receive a performance bonus equal to $
    2,000. The full amount of the bonus will be paid for teachers who work the full school
    year and those who work less than the full school year will receive a prorated amount.

18. A teacher is not eligible for both a bonus under this section and a bonus under the
    “grandfather provision.” To the extent that a teacher may qualify for a bonus under
    both this section and the “grandfather” provision which expires after the 2018-2019
    school year as set forth below, the larger of the two bonuses will be payable.

19. Immediately after school grades are released each year, the District and the Union will
    jointly develop a communication plan to promptly notify and explain to staff at the schools
    the effect the school grade has on them.

Grandfather Provision for Recruitment, Retention and Improvement Bonuses




                                              73
20. Under the former Appendix D and D-1, as amended, teachers working at the identified
    Turnaround and Scale Up Schools were entitled to receive recruitment, retention and
    performance bonuses. The agreements provided that the bonuses would last for two
    years after the school exited such status. Recognizing that the teachers were recruited to
    those schools based on a two year expectation, teachers at the following schools will
    receive the bonuses through the time period listed as follows:


Former Turnaround Schools

         Gulfport Elementary               (2017-2018 through 2018-2019)
         High Point Elementary             (2017-2018 through 2018-19)
         Azalea Middle                     (2017-2018 through 2018-2019)
         John Hopkins Middle               (2017-2018 through 2018-2019)
         Largo Middle                      (2017-2018 through 2018-2019)

      Former Scale Up Schools/ Now Tier IV

         Campbell Park Elementary         (2017-2018 through 2018-2019)
         Fairmount Park Elementary        (2017-2018 through 2018-2019)
         Lakewood Elementary              (2017-2018 through 2018-2019)
         Maximo Elementary                (2017-2018 through 2018-2019)
         Melrose Elementary               (2017-2018 through 2018-2019)
         Midtown Academy                  (2017-2018 through 2018-2019)

21. The amount of the recruitment/retention pay for the former Turnaround Schools is:
           Recruitment bonus =$3,000
            1st year of retention (which is the year after the teacher is recruited) = $3,000
            2nd year of retention = $3,000
            3rd year of retention = $4,000
            4th year of retention = $4,000
            5th year of retention = $4,000
            6th year of retention or more = $6,000

22. The amount of the recruitment/retention pay for the former Scale Up Schools is:

            Recruitment bonus = $5,000
            1st year of retention (which is the year after the teacher is recruited) = $5,000
            2nd year of retention = $5,000
            3rd year of retention = $5,000
            4th year of retention = $5,000
            5th year of retention = $5,000
            6th year of retention or more = $6,000

23.   Teachers at the above schools are eligible to receive $1,000 if two of the following are
      achieved and $2,000 if all three of the following are achieved during the time frame
      identified above:


            a) Improve by one school letter grade.




                                             74
             b) Increase school value-added scores on the 50-point scale by 3 points.

             c) 90% of the staff participated in annual school wide professional
                development. Annual school wide Professional Development to be defined
                by the faculty and site-based administration based on the School
                Improvement Plan. Annual Professional Development and the exact
                requirement to achieve 90% to be communicated by the Principal to all
                staff during preplanning.

24.   A teacher is not eligible for both a recruitment and retention bonus. The full amount
      of the bonus will be paid for teachers who work the full school year and those who work
      less than the full school year will receive a prorated amount.

Professional Development

25.     A Professional Development committee, consisting of an equal number of members
      designated by the District and PCTA respectively, will meet at least twice a school year
      to monitor the professional development plan , review data, and analyze the
      effectiveness and efficacy of the professional support and development system for Tier
      III and Tier IV schools. This committee will mutually develop the Professional
      Development calendar for the school year. This committee will seek input from the
      various stakeholders including the school leadership teams at each of the schools and
      fulfill the above functions for the future. Nothing contained herein is intended to preclude
      the Principal of each of the Tier III and Tier IV schools from assessing the professional
      development needs of teachers, recommending additional professional development and
      otherwise performing the duties and responsibilities of a school Principal under Sections
      1001.54 and 1012.28, F.S.




                                              75
                                     Appendix A
       Performance and Grandfathered Salary Schedules for 2014-2015 and Beyond

Beginning with the 2015-2016 school year, the parties will annually identify the amount of funds
available for annual salary adjustments for instructional employees. The funds will be allocated to
each of the two salary schedules (performance and grandfathered) pro-rated based on the total
salary of the members of each schedule. Due to the numerous variables which cannot be
predicted at this time, this formula may need to be reconsidered if the parties determine that the
schedules cannot be practically implemented.

The funds allocated to the performance salary schedule, as set forth above, will be allocated
among all instructional employees eligible to receive annual salary adjustments. An employee is
eligible to receive an annual salary adjustment to their base salary if they have received an
effective or highly effective rating on their annual performance evaluation for the preceding year.
The annual salary adjustment allocated to highly effective instructional employees on the
performance pay schedule must be greater than the largest adjustment received that year by any
employee on the grandfathered schedule. The amount of the annual salary adjustment for an
instructional employee rated effective will be at a rate of 75% of the amount allocated to
instructional employees rated highly effective. All personnel on the performance pay schedule will
receive only a cost of living adjustment (COLA), if one is granted as described below.

The funds allocated to the grandfathered salary schedule, as set forth above, will be allocated
among the instructional employees on the grandfathered salary schedule at the discretion of the
bargaining representatives of the Pinellas Classroom Teachers Association, provided that any
annual adjustment on the grandfathered salary schedule shall not be greater than the annual
adjustment available to highly effective instructional employees on the performance pay
schedule. Only instructional employees receiving a highly effective, effective, developing or needs
improvement rating on their annual performance evaluation for the preceding year will be eligible
for an annual salary adjustment. Instructional staff rated unsatisfactory will not be eligible for an
adjustment. All personnel on the grandfathered salary schedule will receive the (COLA) if one is
granted as described below.

From the available funds each year, an amount may be set aside for the COLA to be distributed
equally among all instructional employees. The COLA if granted will not exceed 50% of the
annual salary adjustment provided to instructional employees rated as effective on the
performance salary schedule.

Continuing Contract (CC) or Professional Services Contract (PS) instructional employees on the
grandfathered schedule who elect to move to the performance salary schedule may do so at any
time prior to July 1 of each year. For any CC or PS instructional employee making that election,
the base salary of the prior school year will become their new base salary prior to any
adjustments made for the ensuing school year on the performance salary schedule. Any CC or
PS instructional employee opting to be placed on the performance salary schedule will relinquish
that contract and be placed on an Annual Contract and may not return to a CC or PS or the
grandfathered salary schedule.

Placement of Annual Contract Teachers: All teachers on an annual contact as of July 1, 2014, will




                                                 76
move to the performance salary schedule unless otherwise provided by law. The base salary for
teachers placed on the performance salary schedule will be at a salary level equal to the step on
the most current grandfathered schedule. Teachers, who are fully hired to Pinellas County
Schools having previous verifiable instructional experience outside of the district, will be placed
on the performance salary schedule at a salary level equal to the stop on the most current
grandfathered schedule for such years of experience.

Should the current statutes regarding any of these salary issues change, the parties agree to
renegotiate any and all of the provisions of this agreement. Additionally, such implementation of
any salary increases is contingent on availability of district funds. Annual adjustments are subject
to budget constraints and not guaranteed.




                                                 77
                                     APPENDIX A1
                        PINELLAS COUNTY SCHOOL BOARD

                     Grandfathered Salary Schedule 2018-2019



                                      [add schedule]]


                        Performance Salary Schedule 2018-2019

                                      APPENDIX A2

                                    APPENDIX B
                                OTHER COMPENSATION

5. The hourly rate for summer school shall be the teacher’s hourly rate.

6. The hourly rate to be paid to teachers, who work with students in programs known as
   Extended Learning Programs (ELP’s), shall be twenty dollars ($20) per hour for the 2013-
   2014 school year. Such payment shall be retroactive to July 1, 2013. Beginning with the
   2014-2015 school year, the hourly rate of pay for ELP teachers will equal the teacher’s
   base hourly rate (which excludes referendum) up to a maximum of twenty nine ($29)
   dollars per hour. The parties agree that the term “ELP” encompasses a broad range of
   school programs.

7. Beginning September 28, 2013, teachers who are offered non-student contact work beyond
   their regular contractual day shall be paid twenty ($20) dollars per hour to perform work
   writing or adapting curriculum, working on school improvement initiatives as outlined in
   school improvement plans approved by the district, or working on grant-related activities as
   outlined in district-approved grants.

8. The hourly rate to be paid to teachers who work at the Career, Technical and Adult
   Education (CTAE) centers in addition to their employment as a full time teacher shall be
   twenty ($20) dollars per hour for the 2013-2014 school year. Such payment shall be
   retroactive to July 1, 2013. However, teachers who are assigned to teach high skill/high
   wage or performance - earning CTAE funded programs or critical need areas that require
   highly specialized skills or expertise such as registered nurses, will continue to be paid with
   a range of $20 to $30 dollars per hour.

9. Junior Reserve Officer Training Corp. (JROTC) instructors shall have the option of being
   paid according to the military pay formula or this salary schedule




                                             78
79
