        2004-2007
  Collective Bargaining
    Agreement (CBA)
       Between the
    Santa Ana Unified
 School District (SAUSD)
         and the
  Santa Ana Educators
   Association (SAEA)
        Edition 2
SAEA/SAUSD Agreement
 2004-2007 School Years
     2004-2007
 Collective Bargaining
  Agreement (CBA)
        Between the

  Santa Ana Unified
School District (SAUSD)
          and the

 Santa Ana Educators
 Association (SAEA)

        Edition 2

  SAEA/SAUSD AGREEMENT
  2004-2007 SCHOOL YEARS



          AGREEMENT
                                  BETWEEN THE

               SANTA ANA EDUCATORS' ASSOCIATION/CTA/NEA

                                     AND THE

                    SANTA ANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

                              2004-2007 SCHOOL YEARS




SANTA ANA UNIFIED                               SANTA ANA EDUCATORS
SCHOOL DISTRICT                                 ASSOCIATION/CTA/NEA




By                                              By
  Winston Best                                    Louise Settino-Sobieski
  Associate Superintendent,                       Negotiations Chairperson,
  Human Resources                                 SAEA
                SAEA / SAUSD AGREEMENT
                2004-2007 SCHOOL YEARS

              SANTA ANA BOARD OF EDUCATION
                    Rob Richardson, President
                    Audrey Noji, Vice President
                      Rosemarie Avila, Clerk
                     John Palacio, , Member
                      Sal Tinajero, Member

                       SUPERINTENDENT
                         Al Mijares, Ph.D.

            SANTA ANA EDUCATORS ASSOCIATION
                     Tom Harrison, President
                 Meg Robinson, 1st Vice President
                 Suzanne Ray, 2nd Vice President
                      Pat Morales, Secretary
                    Sandra Rubio, Treasurer

                  SAUSD NEGOTIATING TEAM
                        Winston Best, Chair
                        Barbara Cummings
                        Brenda McGaffigan
                            Lyn Maher
                        Roxanna S. Owings
                         Antonio Espinosa
                          Archie Polanco
                   Keith Breon, Chief Negotiator

                   SAEA NEGOTIATING TEAM
                   Louise Settino-Sobieski, Chair
                David Barton, Ph.D., Spokesperson
                        Maryanne Thomas
                           Sherry Garcia
                          Ron Shepherd
        Gladys Hall-Kessler, Ph.D., SAEA Executive Director
Joe Krause, SAEA Executive Director
                      TABLE OF CONTENTS



                                                           PAGE


ARTICLE I       DURATION                                    1
ARTICLE II      RECOGNITION                                 2
ARTICLE III     DEFINITIONS                                 4
ARTICLE IV      ASSOCIATION RIGHTS                          6
ARTICLE V       EVALUATION PROCEDURES                      11
ARTICLE VI      GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE                        17
ARTICLE VII     WAGES AND WAGE PROVISIONS                  23
ARTICLE VIII    HOURS OF WORK                              39
ARTICLE IX      CLASS SIZE                                 47
ARTICLE X       ABSENCES/LEAVES                            50
ARTICLE XI      TRANSFER/REASSIGNMENT PROVISIONS           72
ARTICLE XII     SAFETY CONDITIONS                          79
ARTICLE XIII    PROVISIONS RESERVED TO THE GOVERNING BOARD 86
ARTICLE XIV     DISCIPLINE                                 89
ARTICLE XV      EMPLOYEE BENEFITS                          91
ARTICLE XVI     SUMMER SCHOOL                              97
ARTICLE XVII    WORK STOPPAGE                             103
ARTICLE XVIII   CONCERNS/COMPLAINTS AGAINST UNIT MEMBERS 104
ARTICLE XIX     PERSONNEL FILE                            106
ARTICLE XX      PEER ASSISTANCE AND REVIEW                107
ARTICLE XXI     CONTRACT WAIVER                           118
ARTICLE XXII    MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS                  120
ARTICLE XXIII   RETIRED TEACHERS                          122
ARTICLE XXIV    YEAR-ROUND SCHOOLS                        123
ARTICLE XXV     BEGINNING TEACHER INCENTIVE FUNDING       125
ARTICLE XXVI    HIGH SCHOOL EXTENDED DAY                  126


  APPENDIX A    SCHEDULE OF SALARIES FOR TEACHERS         130
  APPENDIX B    PSYCHOLOGIST SALARY SCHEDULE              132
  APPENDIX C    WAIVER FORM                               133
  APPENDIX D    1-EVALUATION PLAN                         134
                2-OBSERVATION/EVALUATION FORM             135
                3-EVALUATION FORM                         137
  APPENDIX E   1-GRIEVANCE FORM                            139
               2-GRIEVANCE RESPONSE FORM                   140


INFORMATION                                                141
                   MEMORANDA OF UNDERSTANDING

               Effect of Collective Bargaining Agreement   149
               Retirement Incentive                        150
               Health and Welfare Benefits                 151
This page intentionally left blank
                                   ARTICLE I

                                 1.0 DURATION

1.1   This Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) is made and entered into this
      23rd day of March, 2004 between the Santa Ana Unified School District,
      1601 East Chestnut Avenue, Santa Ana, California, 92701, hereinafter
      referred to as the “District”, and the Santa Ana Educators
      Association/CTA/NEA, 2107 North Broadway, Suite 305, Santa Ana
      California, 92706, hereinafter referred to as the “Association”.

1.2   The term of this Agreement is for the three (3) school years commencing
      July 1, 2004, and terminating June 30, 2007. This Agreement shall be
      entered into upon ratification by the SAEA and the District and shall
      become effective July 1, 2004.

1.3   Both parties agree that during the term of this three (3) year Agreement,
      either party may demand bargaining pertaining to State or Federal
      legislation.

1.4   The District may re-open negotiations in accordance with 7.6.2.1.

1.5   The Association may re-open negotiations in accordance with 7.6.3.2.

1.6   Other sections of the CBA may be re-opened only by mutual consent
      except where specifically permitted by the CBA itself or required by law.

1.7   No later than May 1, 2007 each party shall present proposals for a
      successor agreement.




                                        1                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                                    ARTICLE II

                               2.0 RECOGNITION

2.1   The District recognizes the Santa Ana Educators Association as the exclusive
      representative as defined in Section 3540.1(e) of the Government Code. The
      exclusive representative shall represent the unit of employees as described
      below:

      2.1.1 Included: (also includes unit members on teacher salary schedule under
            contract)

                  Classroom Teachers
                  Counselors
                  District Curriculum Specialists
                  Emergency Permit/Interns/Pre-Intern Teachers
                  Home Teachers (receiving benefits)
                  Librarians
                  Media Specialists
                  Itinerant Teachers
                  Nurses
                  Outreach Consultants
                  Program Specialists
                  Project Assistants
                  Project Coordinators
                  Psychologists
                  Resource Teachers
                  ROP Teachers
                  Special Education Teachers
                  Speech/Language Specialists
                  Summer School Teachers
                  Temporary Teachers

      2.1.2 Excluded: All other hourly employees, all substitutes, supervisory,
            confidential and/or management employees, including, but not limited to,
            those listed below:

                  Superintendent
                  Deputy Superintendents
                  Associate Superintendent
                  Chief Academic Officer
                  Chief Facilities Officer
                  Assistant Superintendents
                  Area Administrators
                  Principals
                  Assistant Principals
                  Directors
                  Assistant Directors
                  Coordinators
                  Facilitators

                                         2                       SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
  2.2      Disputes concerning the interpretation and application of this Article are not
                     subject to the grievance provisions of Article V.
                                        ARTICLE III

                                    3.0   DEFINITIONS

3.1     "Unit Member" - Unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context, shall mean
        any person employed by the District in a position or classification which is
        included within the recognized negotiating unit described in Article II
        (Recognition).

3.2     "Duty Day" - Any day on which unit members are to provide service in
        accordance with the hours of work stipulated herein.

3.3     "Teaching Day" - Any duty day when students are required to be in attendance.

3.4     "Instructional Day" - The actual time spent instructing students.

3.5     “Evaluations” – The document produced as a result of formal observations
        and conferences as required by the Stull Bill during the course of one
        school year.

3.6     “Standard(s)” – When used with a Capital “S” shall refer to the California
        Standards for the Teaching Profession (CSTP).

3.7     "Daily Rate of Pay" - Determined by dividing the annual contract salary by the
        number of duty days.

3.8     "Hourly Rate of Pay" - Determined by dividing the daily rate of pay by the number
        of hours in the duty day.

3.9     Personal pronouns herein are for language convenience and do not reflect
        gender.

3.10    Whenever there is a reference in this Agreement to Division Superintendent, it
        means the appropriate superintendent in charge of the following divisions:

              Business
              Curriculum and Instruction
              Facilities
              Human Resources
              Operations
              Personnel

        Area Administrators are designees for the Deputy Superintendent/Chief
        Academic Officer.

3.11    MTYRE - Multi-Track Year-Round Education



                                             3                         SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
       3.11.1    Multi-Track Year-Round Rotating Teacher: A teacher at a multi-track
                 year-round school who changes classrooms two or more times yearly
                 for the purpose of increasing the student capacity of the school.

       3.11.2    Multi-Track Year-Round Roving Teacher: A Teacher at a multi-track
                 year-round school who voluntarily changes classrooms monthly
                 (allowing three other teachers to stay in the same classroom) for the
                 purpose of increasing student capacity of the school.

       3.11.3    Multi-Track Year-Round Sharing Teacher: A teacher at a multi-track
                 year-round school who prepares his or her classroom when going off
                 cycle for a roving teacher whose class will be occupying the room.

3.12   For purposes of defining full-time for the Academic Performance Index (API), full-
       time shall be in accordance with the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA).


                                       ARTICLE IV

                              4.0 ASSOCIATION RIGHTS

4.1    The Association shall have the right to make use of school buildings and facilities
       at all reasonable hours when not otherwise being utilized as determined by the
       site administrator. The Association must obtain permission from the site
       administrator prior to the use of any equipment for any Association business.

4.2    The Association shall have the right to post notices of activities and matters of
       Association concern on designated bulletin boards, at least one of which shall be
       provided at each school site in an area frequented by unit members. The
       Association may use the District mail service in a manner acceptable to the
       United States Postal Service and unit member mailboxes for communications to
       unit members. All posted material and material placed in mailboxes shall be
       identified as Association material. A copy shall be provided the site administrator
       or placed in his/her office prior to posting or placing in mailboxes for information
       purposes. A copy shall be sent to the Associate Superintendent, Human
       Resources.

       4.2.1 When notices of activities and matters of concern originate with CTA or
             NEA, a cover letter shall be provided by SAEA to the site principal or
             his/her designee authorizing the posting and/or distribution to the mail
             boxes, along with a copy of the materials to be posted and/or entered into
             the mailboxes.

       4.2.2 Posting of election materials on the designated bulletin board(s) and/or
             the placing of election materials in mail boxes shall be allowed. Said
             materials shall involve the internal elections of the Association and need
             not show Association identification.

       4.2.3 Authorized representatives of SAEA shall be permitted the use of
             district email, faxes, and other electronic devices to transact official
                                            4                         SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
             Association business provided the business does not interfere with
             the instructional process and/or interfere with the performance of
             assignments made by the administrator.

             4.2.3.1       Email, faxes, and other electronic devices may not be
                           utilized to encourage or condone illegal activities.


             4.2.3.2       Email may be used by unit members outside times of
                           active instruction such as before and after school and
                           during duty free lunches.

             4.2.3.3       Association shall have the right to sign and process all
                           grievances without the presence of the unit member on
                           whose behalf the grievance is being processed.



             4.3.3.1       This does not change section 6.11.8 of the CBA
                           which provides for the right of an individual to file and
                           process his/her grievance without Association
                           representation.

4.3   Authorized representatives of the Association shall be permitted to transact
      official Association business on school property provided the business does not
      interfere with the instructional process and/or interfere with the performance of
      assignments made by the administrator.


4.4   Tuesday shall be designated as Association meeting day. No meetings with
      required attendance by unit members will be scheduled from the end of the
      school day until 7:00 p.m. On the Tuesday on which the Association's
      Representative Council meets, no meetings with required attendance by unit
      members will be scheduled after the end of the school day. Voluntary
      attendance meetings on Tuesdays will be limited.

4.5   Names, addresses, site location and telephone numbers of all District unit
      members, except those who have indicated the information be withheld, shall be
      provided at cost to the Association no later than November 1 of each school
      year.

4.6   The Association President's designee shall be provided up to sixty (60) days of
      release time at no loss of salary or other benefits, with the cost of the substitute
      borne by the Association.

      4.6.1 The Association President shall be released with full salary and benefits
            from all District responsibilities for the term of this Agreement. The
            Association shall reimburse the District the amount of one-half (1/2) the
            Association President's salary and benefits for that period. If this
            provision is ruled illegal by PERB or a court of law, the Association shall
                                           5                         SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
            reimburse the District 100% plus retroactivity for the duration of the
            agreement.

            4.6.1.1      The position of President of the Santa Ana Educators
                         Association (SAEA) shall be regarded as a 12-month
                         assignment (225-day calendar) and shall be paid
                         monthly. The placement on the Certificated Salary
                         schedule shall be appropriate for the President of SAEA.
                         That portion beyond the traditional 10-month calendar
                         shall be equal to the daily rate of pay for the additional
                         days of assignment beyond the traditional calendar
                         year.    Upon written request, the Association shall
                         reimburse the Santa Ana Unified School District for the
                         actual added amount as well as the STRS, Medicare, and
                         Workers’ Compensation costs/expenses resulting from
                         the additional days beyond the traditional calendar year.
                         The President of the SAEA shall continue to be a full-
                         time release position.

      4.6.2 The District shall provide up to forty (40) days of release time for unit
            members who serve on committees of CTA/NEA to attend required
            meetings. However, no individual unit member shall be released for such
            purposes more than twenty (20) days in any one school year. The cost
            will be billed to the respective organization.

      4.6.3 The District shall provide 50% of the total number of days needed by the
            Association for the unit members to participate in NEA-sponsored
            meetings. The cost will be billed to SAEA.

4.7   A unit member may be allowed to obtain representation in all interviews
      concerning terms and conditions within this contract and shall be allowed to
      obtain representation in any matter which the unit member believes may lead to
      discipline. Any denial of such representation may be appealed to the Associate
      Superintendent, Human Resources. Obtaining such representation shall not
      unduly delay the interview.

4.8   Association Membership/Organizational Security/Deductions

      4.8.1 Any unit member who is an Association member on the effective date of
            this Agreement shall continue to have deduction of dues for the remainder
            of this Agreement.

            4.8.1.1      The District shall notify the Association of new hires and
                         indicate their names, addresses, phone numbers, and work
                         sites within 72 hours (three duty days) of the new hire
                         signing a contract.

        4.8.2 Any unit member who is not a member of the Association, or who does
              not apply for membership within thirty (30) days of the effective date of
              this agreement, or within thirty (30) days from the date of
                                          6                        SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
      commencement of assigned duties within the bargaining unit, shall
      become a member of the Association or pay to the Association a fee in
      an amount equal to membership dues, payable to the Association in
      one lump-sum cash payment in the same manner as required for the
      payment of membership dues. In the event that a unit member does
      not pay such fee directly to the Association, the Association shall so
      inform the District, and the District shall immediately begin automatic
      payroll deduction as provided in Education Code section 45061 and in
      the same manner as set forth in this Article. There shall be no charge
      to the Association for such mandatory agency fee deductions.

4.8.3 Each bargaining unit member will have the option to convert from
      service fee payer status to Association membership at any time.

4.8.4 Pursuant to procedures as referenced in 4.8.1 and 4.8.2 above, the
      District shall deduct one-tenth of such dues or service fees from the
      regular salary check of the unit member each month for ten (10)
      months, September through June. Deductions for unit members who
      become Association members or service fee payers after the start of
      the traditional school year shall be appropriately prorated.

4.8.5 All sums deducted by the District for Association members or service
      fee payers shall be remitted to the Association on a monthly basis
      accompanied by an alphabetical list of unit members for whom such
      deductions have been made.

4.8.6 The Association and the District agree to furnish each other any
      information needed to fulfill the provisions of this Article.

4.8.7 Upon appropriate written notification from the unit member, the District
      shall deduct from the salary of any unit member and make appropriate
      remittance for any plan or program jointly approved by the District and
      the Association if in compliance with the regulations of the Orange
      County Department of Education.

4.8.8 Any unit member who is a member of a religious body whose traditional
      tenets or teaching include objections to joining or financially supporting
      employee organizations shall not be required to join or financially
      support the Association. Such unit member shall pay, in lieu of a
      service fee, sums equal to such service fee to one of the following non-
      religious, non-labor organization, charitable funds exempt from taxation
      under section 501(c)(3) of Title 26 of the Internal Revenue Code:

      4.8.8.1     Foundation to Assist California Teachers

      4.8.8.2     Olive Crest

      4.8.8.3     Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial Scholarship Fund

      4.8.8.4     Cesar Chavez Memorial Scholarship Fund

                                  7                         SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                4.8.8.5     Kindercaminata

                4.8.8.6     House Ear Clinic, Inc.

                4.8.8.7     Santa Ana Education Foundation

         4.8.9 To receive a religious exemption, the unit member must submit a
               detailed written statement establishing the basis for the religious
               exemption. The Association Board of Directors shall communicate in
               writing to the unit member its acceptance or rejection of the exemption.
               If accepted, the unit member shall make the payment to an appropriate
               charity as described above. Such payment shall be made on or before
               October 15 of each school year. Proof of payment shall be made on an
               annual basis as a condition of continued exemption from the payment
               of the service fee. If such proof is not delivered to the Association and
               the District on or before November 15 of each year, the District shall
               deduct the appropriate yearly service fee funds from the unit member
               and remit those funds to the Association.

         4.8.10 The Association agrees to pay to the District all reasonable legal fees
                and legal costs incurred in defending against any court action and/or
                administrative action challenging the legality or constitutionality of the
                agency fee provisions of this agreement or their implementation. The
                Association shall have the exclusive right to decide and determine
                whether any such action or proceeding referred to above shall or shall
                not be compromised, resisted, defended, tried, or appealed.

4.9    One or more members of the District and the Association shall meet on a regular
       basis during the year for the purpose of maintenance of this agreement.

4.10   In any new teacher orientation program sponsored by the District, the
       Association shall have the opportunity to make a membership presentation to the
       assembled new teachers.

4.11   Upon the request of the unit member and the professional growth advisor, the
       president of the Association may provide verification of participation in, or
       completion of, acceptable Association-related activities.

4.12   On any District staff development day, the Association shall have the
       opportunity, before the general assembly, to make announcements and
       disseminate information, e.g., have an information table.


                                      ARTICLE V

                              ARTICLE V: EVALUATION

5.1    EVALUATION PLAN

                                            8                         SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
The purpose of evaluation is to improve instruction. Toward this end, site
administration shall primarily assist unit members in meeting the California
Standards for the Teaching Profession (CSTP).

5.1.1 No later than twenty-five (25) duty days following commencement of
      duties, the unit member shall submit the Standards (CSTP) for the
      ensuing year.     Within fifteen (15) duty days following this
      submission, the unit member and evaluator shall meet and agree on
      those Standards that shall be applied for evaluative purposes. The
      evaluation procedure shall be discussed in this meeting unless
      previously discussed individually or presented at a staff/faculty
      meeting.

            5.1.1.1   The evaluation of first year pre-intern/intern and
                      emergency        permit   unit  members,    credentialed
                      temporary and categorically funded unit members, and
                      probationary unit members shall be based on two (2) of
                      the first five (5) Standards and one element of Standard
                      6: Develops as a Professional Educator.

            5.1.1.2   The evaluation of second or more years pre-intern/intern
                      and emergency permit unit members, second and third
                      year credentialed temporary and categorically funded
                      unit members and second-year probationary unit
                      member shall be based on the remaining three (3)
                      Standards and one element of Standard 6: Develops as
                      a Professional Educator.

            5.1.1.3   Every evaluation year, the evaluation of permanent and
                      continuing credentialed temporary (three or more years
                      in the District) unit members shall be based on three (3)
                      of the Standards and one element of Standard 6:
                      Develops as a Professional Educator.

    5.1.2      The Standards shall be specified in writing on the negotiated
                Evaluation Plan Form. In the event the written standards are
                not mutually agreed on, the designated evaluator may
                substitute up to two (2) Standards and/or one (1) Standard for
                each “unsatisfactory” received in the preceding evaluation. A
                Standard is identified as “unsatisfactory” if it has three (3) or
                more elements marked as “Below Standard”.

            5.1.2.1   Within five (5) duty days following determination of the
                      Standards for the teaching profession, the unit member
                      may submit to the designated evaluator written
                      constraints which the unit member believes shall
                      prevent him/her from attaining the Standards.



                                     9                        SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
          5.1.2.2   If agreement is not reached regarding Standards, the
                    unit member        may appeal   to the Associate
                    Superintendent, Human Resources, or designee, who
                    shall make the final decision.

          5.1.2.3   Probationary, pre-intern/intern, temporary, categorically
                    funded, and emergency-credentialed unit members shall
                    be formally evaluated in writing no more than twice
                    annually.

          5.1.2.4   Permanent unit members with a satisfactory evaluation
                    the preceding year, including ROP teachers and
                    categorically funded unit members who have been
                    employed in the district at least three (3) consecutive
                    preceding years, shall be evaluated every other school
                    year except per Ed. Code 44938.

          5.1.2.5   Permanent unit members with at least ten (10) years of
                    District service who are highly qualified (pursuant to
                    ESEA/NCLB) and whose previous evaluation meets
                    Standards may mutually agree in writing with her/his
                    evaluator to be evaluated at least every five (5) years.
                    The unit member or the evaluator may rescind this
                    agreement at any time but not during the school year the
                    evaluation is taking place except per Ed. Code 44938.

          5.1.2.6   If a unit member transfers or changes assignments
                    during the five (5) year period, a new agreement shall be
                    signed, if mutual agreement continues.

5.1.3     The unit member being evaluated and the evaluator shall select
          observation times, dates, conferences and final evaluation dates.

          5.1.3.1   During the course of the evaluation period
                    circumstances may change which require modification
                    of the original schedule.    The unit member and
                    designated evaluator shall agree in writing upon a
                    revised schedule.

5.1.4     The Unit Member may request a change of designated evaluator
          in writing including reasons for the request. If the designated
          evaluator denies the request, the unit member may appeal to the
          Associate Superintendent, Human Resources, or designee. The
          reasons for denial of a change of evaluator shall be given in
          writing to the unit member upon their request. Reasons for denial
          shall not be arbitrary or capricious.

5.1.5 Portfolio assessment of students may become a part unit member's
         evaluation process if initiated and identified by the unit member as part
                                    10                        SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
              of an element and agreed to by the evaluator. Portfolio assessments
              of students shall not be added by the evaluator.

5.2   Formal Observations

      5.2.1   Formal observations shall emphasize the unit member's primary
              assignment.

              5.2.1.1 Prior to an observation, the unit member and the
                       designated evaluator shall agree on the Standard to be
                       observed.

              5.2.1.2 No formal observations shall be scheduled before one (1)
                       week after the beginning of a cycle/semester or after
                       one (1) week before the end of a cycle/semester or
                       winter break.

              5.2.1.3    Formal classroom observations shall last for at least
                         fifteen (15) minutes and no more than sixty (60) minutes.

              5.2.1.4    Unit members shall have no more than two (2) formal
                         observations per each evaluation.   A third formal
                         observation shall be added if:

                        5.2.1.4.1   The unit member was marked “Below
                                    Standard” on three (3) or more elements on a
                                    Standard in the second observation, in which
                                    case the unit members shall be observed on
                                    that Standard a third time.

                        5.2.1.4.2   With agreement of both the unit member and
                                    the evaluator, the number of classroom
                                    observations may be reduced in cases of
                                    obvious satisfactory performance by
                                    permanent unit members.

      5.2.2   After each formal observation, the evaluator shall present a
              written report of the observation using the negotiated Formal
              Observation Form to the unit member within five (5) duty days
              following the observation. A post-observation conference shall
              be held within ten (10) duty days following the formal observation
              to discuss and review the observation and/or report. Reasonable
              adjustments may be made to these time frames by mutual written
              agreement between the permanent unit member and the
              evaluator. The unit member shall sign the written observation
              report indicating that he/she has read the report; the signature
              does not indicate the unit member's agreement with the report
              but that the report was received by the unit member.


                                       11                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
               5.2.2.1     The progress towards achieving the selected element of
                           Standard 6 shall be discussed at each formal post
                           observation conference.

      5.2.3    If the observation discloses in writing specific elements in which
               improvement is needed, the evaluator shall make specific written
               suggestions and offer positive assistance aimed at achieving the
               needed improvement. The evaluator's role to assist the unit
               member shall include, but not be limited to, the following in so far
               as practical:

               5.2.3.1     Specific written recommendations for improvement;

               5.2.3.2     District assistance to implement such recommendations;

               5.2.3.3     Provision of additional resources, without cost to the
                           unit member, to be utilized to assist with improvements;

               5.2.3.4     Techniques to measure improvement;

               5.2.3.5     A time schedule to monitor progress;

               5.2.3.6     These written suggestions shall be presented to the unit
                           member at the time of the post-observation conference.
                           It is the unit member’s responsibility to take appropriate
                           action to correct any deficiencies.

5.3   Informal Observations and “Walk-Throughs”

      5.3.1 Informal observations and “Walk-Throughs” may be conducted at
            reasonable times during a school year and with reasonable
            frequency. Areas of concern may be brought to a unit member’s
            attention.

5.4   Formal Evaluations

      5.4.1    Any Formal Observation Form that has an element marked
               “Below Standard” shall not be used on an Evaluation unless
               positive assistance has been offered and implemented as per
               section 5.2.3 of the CBA and at least one follow-up observation
               has been conducted. Any follow-up formal observation must
               adhere to the timelines in 5.2.1.1 through 5.2.1.3 and 5.2.3.5.

      5.4.2    In preparing the Evaluation Form for placement in the unit
               member's personnel file, the evaluator shall rely only upon data
               collected through formal classroom observations and the element
               of Standard 6 when applicable as agreed upon in the post
               observation conference (5.2.2.1). Any deficiencies that may have
               been brought to the attention of the unit member, and
                                         12                       SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
              subsequently corrected, shall not be included in the final
              evaluation. Commendations for growth demonstrated by the unit
              member may be included.

      5.4.3   The completed Evaluation Form shall be submitted to the unit
              member no later than thirty (30) duty days preceding the close of
              the school year and four (4) duty days prior to the evaluation
              conference. The evaluator and the unit member shall meet to
              review the evaluation report. Within ten (10) duty days thereafter,
              the unit member shall sign the Evaluation Form (report) indicating
              only that he/she has read the report, understands it and has been
              given the opportunity of responding to it in writing; the signature
              does not indicate the unit member's agreement with the
              evaluation. The unit member's written response, if any, shall be
              attached to the report and become a permanent part thereof.

      5.4.4   A unit member shall not be evaluated on or held accountable for
              any aspect of the educational program over which the unit
              member has no authority or ability to correct deficiencies.

5.5   General Provisions

      5.5.1   Evaluation Forms – The only forms used in the observation and
              evaluation process shall be the forms mutually developed and
              mutually agreed to by the District and the Association. Agreed
              upon forms shall be included in the Appendix of the Certificated
              Collective Bargaining Agreement.

      5.5.2   Traveling Unit Members - Unit members who spend time at more
              than one site shall be evaluated by one mutually agreed upon pre-
              designated administrator with input from administrators at other
              sites to which the unit member is assigned.

      5.5.3   Source of Evaluative Data - No information or material gathered
              from sources other than the designated evaluator shall be utilized
              in   a    formal    observation   or    evaluation.   Disciplinary
              memos/notes/actions shall not be used in the Evaluation Form or
              process except for actions related to the element of Standard 6:
              Develops as a Professional Educator.

      5.5.4   Grievance Procedure Utilization - The use of the grievance
              procedure for this Article shall be limited to the procedure
              outlined in the evaluation process. Unit members who grieve
              their evaluation shall concurrently proceed with improving noted
              deficiencies while the grievance is being processed.

      5.5.5   Unit members shall not be permitted to participate in the
              evaluation(s) and/or observation(s) of other unit members, except

                                      13                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
        as provided for in the Peer Assistance and Review (PAR) Article
        in this Agreement.

5.5.6   All unit members shall be inserviced at least once a year in the
        California Standards for the Teaching Profession and the
        evaluation process and given a copy of a District/Association
        approved rubric.

5.5.7   A permanent employee who receives an unsatisfactory final,
        formal evaluation shall be evaluated each year thereafter until the
        employee’s performance becomes satisfactory or until the
        employee is separated from the District.

5.5.8   The Evaluation Article of the CBA is intended to comply with the
        requirements of the California Education Code.




                           ARTICLE VI

                 6.0 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES


                                14                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
6.1   A grievance is defined as a statement that the District has violated section(s) of
      this Agreement and that by reason of any such violation, the grievant's rights
      have been adversely affected.

      6.1.1     A grievant may be any unit member or the Association.

6.2   All other matters and disputes of any nature are beyond the scope of these
      procedures.

      6.2.1     For resolution of those matters outside of the scope of this Article,
                refer to Information, Section IN.3, Report of Recommendation/
                Concern.

6.3   If a grievance involves more than one unit member, then all should have the
      opportunity to sign and the Association may pursue the grievance. At least one
      of the grievants involved shall sign and be present at all conferences held.

6.4   The term "days" when used in this Article shall, except where otherwise
      indicated, mean duty days of the unit member. The day of receipt is not
      considered one of the days when "days" is used.

6.5   Monitor of Procedure - The Associate Superintendent, Human Resources shall
      monitor all proceedings and shall be available for procedural advice to all parties.
      The Monitor shall receive copies of written grievance(s) and responses at all
      levels.

6.6   The number of days as stated at each level should be considered as maximum,
      and every effort should be made to expedite the process.

      6.6.1     An administrator or a grievant may for good cause request an
                extension of time for a conference, response or an appeal. Such
                request shall state the reason for the extension in writing to the
                Associate Superintendent, Human Resources, who shall grant or deny
                the request, determine the extension time, and notify all parties of the
                decision rendered. The Associate Superintendent's decision shall not
                be arbitrary or capricious or unreasonable.

6.7   Level One:

      6.7.1     The unit member with a grievance shall first present the matter orally
                to the supervising administrator not later than fifteen (15) duty days
                following the occurrence which prompted the grievance or within fifteen
                (15) duty days of the time when the grievant would reasonably be
                expected to know that he/she has been adversely affected. Upon
                request, an additional ten (10) days may be granted by the Associate
                Superintendent, Human Resources.
                6.7.1.1 The grievant shall state that this is an "oral grievance," citing
                the Article and section number of the Agreement that allegedly has
                been violated.


                                           15                        SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
      6.7.2   If the grievance is unable to be resolved orally, the grievant may
              reduce the grievance to writing on the approved District form and
              present the completed form to the immediate supervising administrator
              within ten (10) duty days following the oral conference or oral
              response. The grievance shall set forth specifically the item contained
              within this Agreement upon which the grievance is based. It shall also
              contain the adverse effect on the grievant and suggested solution(s).
              The supervising administrator shall direct a copy of the grievance to
              the Associate Superintendent, Human Resources.

              6.7.2.1 If the Level I supervising administrator believes the
              grievance is not within the authority of Level I, he/she shall so indicate
              on the response form and return it and the original grievance form to
              the grievant.

      6.7.3   The grievant and the supervising administrator shall confer (in a
              meeting called by the supervising administrator) on the grievance with
              the view to arriving at a mutually satisfactory solution to the problem.

              6.7.3.1 The supervising administrator may waive the conference.
              Such waiver shall be in writing to the grievant.

      6.7.4   At the conference, the grievant may appear alone, or he/she may be
              represented. When the unit member is represented, the representative
              must be identified on the grievance form and the unit member must be
              present. Under unforeseen circumstances, an authorized substitute is
              permissible. Likewise, the supervising administrator must be present
              and may request others to be in attendance.


      6.7.5   Following the conference, the supervising administrator shall
              communicate, in writing on the District-approved form, the decision to
              the grievant, the Association and Associate Superintendent, Human
              Resources. The original grievance form shall be returned to the
              grievant.

              6.7.5.1 The supervising administrator has ten (10) duty days from
              receipt of the written grievance to hold the conference and render a
              decision.

      6.7.6   If the alleged Agreement violation was based upon a decision or
              practice of a Deputy Superintendent or designee, the Level I proce-
              dures may be waived by the grievant and the grievance submitted
              directly to the appropriate Division Superintendent.

              6.7.6.1 If the Deputy Superintendent or designee believes the
              decision was in fact made at Level I, he/she may remand the
              grievance to that level for processing.

6.8   Level Two

                                        16                         SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
      6.8.1    In the event the grievance is not sustained at Level I, the grievant may
               appeal in writing to the Associate Superintendent, Human Resources,
               or his/her designee. Such an appeal shall be made within ten (10)
               duty days after the unit member has received the decision from
               Level I. The appeal shall contain the original grievance and Level I
               response with any documents provided at Level I.

      6.8.2    The Deputy Superintendent or designee shall meet and confer with the
               grievant on the grievance with a view to arriving at a mutually
               satisfactory resolution to the grievance. When the unit member is
               represented, he/she must be present.

      6.8.3    The Level I supervising administrator(s) shall be present at the request
               of either party.

      6.8.4    Following the conference, the Associate Superintendent, Human
               Resources or designee shall communicate the decision, in writing on
               the District-approved form, to the grievant, the Association, and the
               supervising administrator(s). The original grievance form shall be
               returned to the grievant.

               6.8.4.1 The Associate Superintendent, Human Resources or
               designee has fifteen (15) duty days from receipt of the written appeal
               to hold the conference and render a decision.

      6.8.5    The designee shall not be any other administrator from the Human
               Resources division.

6.9   Level Three

      6.9.1    If the grievance is not sustained at Level II, the grievant may appeal
               the decision in writing to the Superintendent of Schools or designee
               within ten (10) duty days after the decision of the Division Superin-
               tendent has been received by the grievant. The appeal shall be
               accompanied by the original grievance and decisions at Level I and
               Level II, with all accompanying documents. Copies of the appeal are
               to be directed to the Associate Superintendent, Human Resources.

      6.9.2    Within fifteen (15) duty days of the receipt of the appeal, the
               Superintendent or his/her designee (a Cabinet-level administrator)
               shall hold a conference and communicate the decision, in writing on
               the District-approved form, to the grievant, the Association, the Level I
               and Level II administrators and the Associate Superintendent, Human
               Resources. If the unit member is represented, he/she must be
               present. The original grievance form shall be returned to the grievant.

      6.9.3    All parties from Levels I and II shall be present at the conference to
               state their views if requested by either party.


                                         17                         SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
       6.9.4     The Superintendent's designee shall not be the Associate
                 Superintendent, Human Resources or other administrator from the
                 office of Human Resources.

6.10   Arbitration

       6.10.1    If the grievance is not sustained at Level III, the grievant, within ten
                 (10) days of the receipt of the Level III response, may request, in
                 writing, that the Association submit the grievance to arbitration.

       6.10.2    If the Association concurs with the grievant's request for arbitration, the
                 Association shall, within fifteen (15) duty days of the receipt of the
                 request, submit a written request to the Superintendent or his/her
                 designee for arbitration of the grievance.

       6.10.3    If any question arises regarding the arbitrability of a grievance, the
                 party raising the question of arbitrability may, upon request, have such
                 question first ruled upon and decided by an arbitrator prior to any other
                 hearing on the merit of the grievance which would thereafter be
                 conducted by a second and different arbitrator.

                     6.10.3.1 The fees and expenses of the separate arbitrator
                              deciding the issue of arbitrability shall be borne by the
                              losing party.




                                            18                         SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
       6.10.4   The arbitrator shall be selected by mutual agreement by a representa-
                tive of the Association and of the District. If no agreement can be
                reached on a mutually-selected arbitrator within five (5) duty days of
                the written request (6.10.2 above), the parties shall request of the
                State Conciliation Service a list of seven (7) names of persons
                experienced in hearing grievances. Each party shall alternately strike
                a name until only one remains. The first strike shall be by the
                Association.

       6.10.5   Costs of Arbitration

                6.10.5.1 The District and the Association shall share equally in the
                payment for the services and expenses of the arbitrator. All other
                expenses shall be borne by the party incurring them.

       6.10.6   Powers and Limitations of the Arbitrator

                6.10.6.1 The function of the arbitrator shall be to hold a hearing
                concerning the grievance and to render a written decision within twenty
                (20) duty days, if possible, after the closing of the hearing and, in any
                event, as soon as possible thereafter.

                6.10.6.2 The arbitrator shall have no power to alter, amend, change,
                add to, or subtract from any of the terms of this Agreement or the
                written policies, rules, regulations and procedures of the District but
                shall determine only whether or not there has been a violation,
                misinterpretation, or misapplication of this Agreement.

                6.10.6.3 The arbitrator shall not be empowered to render a decision
                on issues not before the arbitrator or on facts not supported by the
                evidence.

                6.10.6.4 The decision of the arbitrator shall be based solely upon the
                evidence and arguments presented by the parties in the presence of
                each other and upon arguments presented in briefs.

                6.10.6.5 Decisions and/or awards made by the arbitrator relative to
                economics shall be restricted to back pay, if appropriate, of the unit
                member and shall not be retroactive beyond the beginning of the last
                payroll period prior to the filing of the grievance.

                6.10.6.6 The decision of the arbitrator, within the limits herein
                prescribed, shall be final and binding upon the grievant, the
                Association, and the District.

6.11   GENERAL PROVISIONS

       6.11.1   No reprisals of any kind shall be taken by any party to this procedure
                against any party, any witness, any representative, or any other
                participant in the grievance procedure by reason of such participation.

                                          19                         SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
      6.11.2   Forms for filing and processing grievances and other documents
               necessary under the procedure shall be prepared by the Human
               Resources Division with input from the Association and given
               appropriate distribution so as to facilitate operation of the grievance
               procedure. All documents, communications, and records dealing with
               the processing of grievances shall be filed in the office of Human
               Resources separately from the personnel file of the participants.

      6.11.3   Failure at any Level of this procedure to communicate the decision on
               a grievance within the specified time limits shall permit the aggrieved
               unit member to proceed to the next level.

      6.11.4   Failure at any step of this procedure to appeal a grievance to the next
               level within the specified time limits shall be deemed as acceptance of
               the decisions as rendered.

      6.11.5   All communications, notices, and papers required to be in writing shall
               be served personally, by U.S. Mail, or through District mail system.

      6.11.6   If the alleged grievance is not signed, or if the unit member fails to
               appear for a scheduled conference without good cause, the grievance
               shall be deemed forfeited and voided.

      6.11.7   Representative(s) may be changed at any level of a grievance.

      6.11.8   If the Association is not the representative, the District shall not agree
               to a resolution of the grievance until the Association has received a
               copy of the grievance and the proposed resolution and has been given
               an opportunity to file a response.

      6.11.9   Reasonable non-instructional released time for the grievant and
               representative shall be granted upon request of the Associate
               Superintendent, Human Resources.

               6.11.9.1 Under unusual circumstances and/or when necessary to
               adhere to time lines within this Agreement, instructional time may be
               granted.

                                    ARTICLE VII

                      7.0 WAGES AND WAGE PROVISIONS

7.1   Table of Contents

      7.1      Table of Contents
      7.2      Column Movement
      7.3      Step Movement
      7.4      Longevity
      7.5      Salary Credit Review Committee
                                       20                           SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
      7.6     Regular Salary Schedule
      7.7     Extra-Service Assignments and Remuneration

              7.7.1     Factor basis
              7.7.2     Service beyond duty day
              7.7.3     Department Chairpersons
              7.7.4     Athletics
              7.7.5     Co-Curricular Assignments
              7.7.6     Extra-Curricular Assignments
              7.7.7     Stipends
              7.7.8     Hourly Rates

7.2   Column Movement

      7.2.1   Acceptable Units/Degrees

              7.2.1.1   Units/Degrees obtained as a result of postgraduate study
                        must be taken from or accepted by a college or university
                        accredited by the Western Association of Schools and
                        Colleges or an accrediting agency of similar status.

              7.2.1.2   Units taken prior to January 1, 1960, must be certified as
                        "graduate level" by the institution in which they were taken,
                        or taken to meet a requirement for an earned California
                        credential.

              7.2.1.3   Units taken prior to the date of this agreement must meet
                        the requirements in effect at that time.

              7.2.1.4   A grade of "C," "pass," or "credit" or better must be earned
                        for a unit to be acceptable.

              7.2.1.5   Units refer to semester units. Quarter units are converted by
                        multiplying by .



      7.2.2   Approval of Units

              7.2.2.1   Credit will be given for units taken to qualify for a clear
                        credential or certificate of competence required in the
                        present assignment. If such a credential or certificate is not
                        held for the present assignment, only those units which meet
                        the requirements for the credential or certificate shall be
                        acceptable.

              7.2.2.2   Credit will be given for units taken to qualify for a credential
                        or certificate outside of the present assignment with advance

                                        21                         SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                  approval of the Assistant Superintendent, Personnel or
                  designee.

        7.2.2.3   If the course work is not (a) in the unit member's major or
                  minor, (b) taken to meet a clear credential requirement, (c)
                  taken to meet a specialized credential requirement, or (d)
                  taken to acquire additional credential authorizations, then
                  the course must be meaningfully related to the present or
                  immediate future assignment, and written approval prior to
                  enrollment is required. Each course approval request must
                  have a course description (copy from college catalog or
                  flyer) attached.

        7.2.2.4   "Meaningfully related" as used in this article means such
                  things as, but not limited to, subjects taught in school by the
                  unit member, Spanish courses, multi-cultural courses,
                  learning theory and/or methodology courses, computer
                  classroom application courses, and courses related to
                  school social problems.

        7.2.2.5   Master's or Doctorate degrees must be meaningfully related
                  to the field of education to qualify for salary schedule
                  placement.

7.2.3   Acceptable Inservice - Inservice which is approved by the District for
        credit shall be credited as follows:

        7.2.3.1   One unit for 15-18 hours of classroom instruction.

        7.2.3.2   One-half unit for 8-14 hours of classroom instruction.

        7.2.3.3   No credit shall be given for less than eight (8) hours of
                  classroom    instruction   unless   approved     by   the
                  Superintendent or designee.

        7.2.3.4   Special education and support staff who complete the
                  specialized SB 1969 training shall be eligible for and receive
                  three (3) semester units. These units can be used for
                  column movement as provided in section 7.2.

7.2.4   Continuing Education Units - CEUs earned by nurses after July 11,
        1986, will be accepted if required for renewal or maintenance of the
        California State Nursing License. CEUs earned by Speech/Language
        Specialists after July 19, 1994, will be accepted if prior approval is
        granted by their administrator and Human Resources.

7.2.5   Workshops/Conferences - To be considered for salary credit, a
        workshop or conference must (a) be meaningfully related, (b) have
        prior approval for attendance and credit, (c) be fully paid for by the unit


                                   22                         SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
               member or party other than the District, and (d) not involve District-
               paid released time. Any exceptions must have prior District approval.

      7.2.6    Procedures for Column Change

               7.2.6.1   Column change will be effective (no retroactivity) the first of
                         the month following receipt in Human Resources of:

                  a.     Application form for column change
                  b.     Official transcript bearing seal and signature of registrar
                  c.     Course approval forms where required
                  d.     Verification under 7.2.2.1 or 7.2.2.2 where required

                         Temporary verifications (grade reports, letters, unofficial
                         transcripts, etc.) will not be acceptable.

               7.2.6.2   Column change which is effective on August 1 or
                         September 1 will be deemed effective on July 1 for
                         applicability to unit members on year-round schedules. All
                         other effective dates will be as indicated in 7.2.6.1 and unit
                         members will be paid for the days worked at the respective
                         salary levels.

               7.2.6.3   Column IV Entry: Unit members seeking to change columns
                         upon receipt of a Master's/Doctorate degree may do so
                         effective the first month following the receipt by the District
                         or official written verification of the completion of all work
                         required for conferral of the Master's/Doctorate degree.

      7.2.7    If a unit member has reached the end of a salary column and remains
               there one year or more, then reclassifies during the year, step
               increase(s) will be granted when the reclassification takes place.

7.3   Step Movement

      7.3.1    Unit members become eligible for annual step movement upon having
               served seventy-five percent (75%) of the duty days in the school year
               in the regular assignment.

      7.3.2    Step, column, and longevity advancement for qualified unit members
               shall be implemented for the duration of the Agreement.

7.4   Longevity - Unit members may advance to steps sixteen (16), twenty-one (21),
      and twenty-six (26) under the following conditions:

      7.4.1    For step 16, unit members shall have rendered fifteen (15) years of
               credited service to the District and be qualified for Class IV.

      7.4.2    For step 21, unit members shall have rendered twenty (20) years of
               credited service to the District and be qualified for Class IV.

                                         23                          SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
      7.4.3    For Step 26, unit members shall have rendered 25 years of credited
               service to the District and be qualified for Class IV.

7.5   Salary Credit Review Committee

      7.5.1    The Salary Credit Review Committee shall review unusual
               circumstances not covered by the provisions contained in this article.
               Unit members may make application for review with rationale to the
               Committee through the Office of Human Resources.

      7.5.2    The Committee shall be composed of three members appointed by the
               Association and two management members appointed by the
               Superintendent. The Committee shall elect a chairperson at its first
               meeting.

      7.5.3    The Committee's written recommendation and rationale shall be
               forwarded to the Superintendent's Cabinet via the Associate
               Superintendent, Human Resources, with a copy sent to the unit
               member.

      7.5.4    The written decision of the Cabinet shall be sent to the unit member
               and to the chairperson of the Committee.

7.6   Regular Salary Schedule

      7.6.1a   School Year 2003-2004 teachers’ and psychologists’ salary
               schedules shall be decreased .5% (one half percent) from the
               2002-2003 salary schedule reflecting a school year of 186 work
               days (180 instructional days, 3 duty days, 3 staff development
               days). Work days for non-186 day unit members’ calendars shall
               be decreased by one day from 2002-2003. This decrease shall be
               applied to all unit members.

      7.6.1b   For school year 2004-2005 teachers' and psychologists' salary
               schedules shall be decreased 3.5% (three and one half percent)
               from the 2003-2004 salary schedule reflecting a school year of
               185 work days (180 instructional days, 2 duty days, 3 staff
               development days). This decrease shall be applied to all unit
               members and follows a decrease of .5% (one half percent) from
               the 2003-2004 salary schedule brought about by the reduction of
               the calendar from 187 work days (180 instructional days, 4 duty
               days, 3 staff development days) to 186 work days (180
               instructional days, 3 duty days, 3 staff development days). Work
               years for all unit members shall be reduced by two days from the
               2002-2003 calendar.

      7.6.2    For school year 2005-2006 the teachers' and psychologists' salary
               schedules and length of work year calendar shall remain the

                                        24                       SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
               same as during 2004-2005 (180 instructional days, 2 duty days, 3
               staff development days).

               7.6.2.1   The District may re-open the negotiations for salaries for
                         2005-2006 if the state reduces the funded base revenue
                         limit per ADA or if enrollment declines by more than
                         1200.

      7.6.3    For school year 2006-2007 the teachers’ and psychologists’ salary
               schedule shall be increased (restored) 4% (four percent)
               reflecting the overall reduction to the teachers’ and
               psychologists’ from 2002-2003. In addition, the 2006-2007 will be
               increased by the same percentage as any funded COLA provided
               by the state to the base revenue limit per ADA received by the
               District during the 2004-2005 and 2005-2006 school years. Any
               other changes to the base revenue limit will be considered within
               the re-opener for 2006-07.

               7.6.3.1   The 2006-2007 calendar shall be 186 work days (180
                         instructional days, 3 duty days, 3 staff development
                         days). Work days for non-186 day unit members’
                         calendars shall be increased by one day from 2005-
                         2006.

               7.6.3.2   The Association may re-open negotiations for salaries
                         for 2006-2007.

               7.6.3.3   Beginning in 2001-2002 the psychologists' salary schedule
                         shall be modified so that Step 11 is reached during year 11
                         of eligible service and Step 16 is reached during year 16 of
                         eligibility service.

      7.6.5    An ROP Salary Study Committee shall be convened with the purpose
               of creating a salary schedule for ROP teachers which will be
               incorporated into this Agreement if ratified. The Committee will consist
               of four (4) members appointed by the Association and four (4)
               members appointed by the District.

      7.6.6    Part-time Employment - Unit members employed on a part-time basis
               shall be paid in accordance with Education Code 45025.

      7.6.7    Extended Work Year - Unit members whose regular assignment is
               extended beyond their normal work year shall be paid for the
               additional days at their regular daily rate and shall be credited with
               additional sick leave as indicated in 8.1.5.

7.7   Extra Service Assignments

      7.7.1    Unless otherwise set forth, Extra Service Assignments shall be
               remunerated based on the product of the assigned factor times
                                         25                        SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                    Class II, Step 5 of the regular salary schedule. All remuneration which
                    is based on a percentage of a salary schedule step will be rounded off
                    to the nearest dollar, except for the Hourly Rate Factors of 7.7.8.

   7.7.2            Any and all remuneration is based upon service beyond the unit
                    member's duty day.

                    7.7.2.1 All remuneration for extra-service assignments shall be paid
                    twice a year if a full-time assignment or at the end of the activity if less
                    than a full year except for department chairpersons, bilingual stipends,
                    and athletic directors, who shall be paid monthly as a part of their
                    contract salary.

   7.7.3            Department Chairperson (basis of Class II, Step 5)

                    7.7.3.1      Department Chairpersons shall be remunerated based upon
                                 the number of classes within their departments, and the
                                 group to which they are assigned, as set forth below:

      FACTOR D                 INTERMEDIATE            COMPREHENSIVE              ALTERNATIVE
(unless otherwise noted)          SCHOOL                HIGH SCHOOL               HIGH SCHOOL
                                    ART                     ART                  MAXIMUM 4 DEPT.
                                                                                 CHAIRS PER UNIT
                                                                                    MEMBER
                                  BUSINESS                BUSINESS
                                                         DRIVER ED.
                                 ENGLISH*                 ENGLISH*
                               ELD/BILINGUAL           ELD/BILINGUAL
                                                       FOREIGN LANG.
                                 HOME EC.                 HOME EC.
                               MATHEMATICS             MATHEMATICS**
                                  MUSIC                    MUSIC
                                 PHYS ED.                 PHYS. ED.
                                 READING*                 READING
                                 SCIENCE                  SCIENCE*
                               SOC. STUDIES             SOC. STUDIES
                                SPECIAL ED.              SPECIAL ED.

   * Factor E see 7.7.3.1.2
 ** Factor F see 7.7.3.1.2


             Number           Factor     Factor    Factor      Factor   Factor       Factor
                of              A          B         C           D        E            F
             Classes
          1-6                 .010       .010          .010     .010    .010         .010
          7-20                .020       .030          .035     .036    .045         .050
          21-35               .030       .035          .040     .045    .050         .055
          36-50               .035       .040          .045     .050    .055         .060
          51-75               .040       .045          .050     .055    .060         .060
          76 plus             .045       .050          .055     .060    .060         .060

                       7.7.3.1.1        Any Department Chairperson serving since 1981-82
                                        whose factor has been retrogressed because of the
                                        new ranking of job responsibilities shall continue with
                                        the 1981-82 rate of pay until the current factor results
                                        in an increase.



                                                  26                              SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
              7.7.3.1.2     Unit members serving as department chairs in 1987
                            88 and who continue in that position shall continue to
                            be remunerated as appropriate at factor E or F.

              7.7.3.1.3     High school librarians shall be given stipends at the 1-
                            6 level.

7.7.4     Athletics

          7.7.4.1     Intramurals

              7.7.4.1.1     Intramural     coaches      will receive     a   weekly
                            compensation based upon three percent (3%) of
                            Class III, Step 7 at the intermediate level and Class III
                            Step 8 at the high school level divided by 11.


                    7.7.4.1.1.1     Intramural coaches at alternative sites shall
                                    receive compensation based on three percent
                                    (3%) of Class III, Step 8, and shall be excluded
                                    from provisions in 7.7.4.1.2 below.

              7.7.4.1.2     If there are more than fifty (50) participants in any
                            intramural program, an additional coach may be
                            added. Should the number of participants drop below
                            fifty-one (51) at any time prior to three (3) weeks
                            before the close of the season, the assignment shall
                            be terminated and the compensation prorated
                            accordingly.

        7.7.4.2     Intermediate Athletics (basis Class III, Step 7)

              7.7.4.2.1     The rate of weekly compensation for intermediate
                            coaches listed below will be determined by dividing
                            the appropriate percent of Class III, Step 7 of the
                            salary schedule by 11. All coaches will be paid for
                            the recognized length of the season of the sport
                            coached.

              7.7.4.2.2     Three (3) or more days of practice/competition per
                            week during spring or winter recess will be considered
                            as one (1) week.

              7.7.4.2.3     District Sports Scheduler - three percent (3%) per
                            semester.

              7.7.4.2.4     School Athletic Director - two percent (2%) per year,
                            each (effective July 1, 1988).

              7.7.4.2.5     Coaches

                                      27                         SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                        Boys Sports               Girls Sports
                          Baseball                    Softball
                      Head Varsity--5%         Head Varsity — 5%
                        Head JV--5%               Head JV--5%
                      Ass’t Coach--4%            Ass’t Coach--4%
                         Basketball                 Basketball
                      Head Varsity--5%          Head Varsity--5%
                        Head JV--5%               Head JV--5%
                            Track                      Track
                      Head Coach--5%            Head Coach--5%
                      Ass’t Coach--4%            Ass’t Coach--4%
                      *Add’l Ass’t--4%          *Add’l Ass’t--4%
                        Flag Football               Volleyball
                      Head Varsity--5%          Head Varsity--5%
                        Head JV--5%               Head JV--5%
                      Ass’t Coach--4%
                           Soccer                Tennis (Co-Ed)
                      Head Varsity--5%          Head Coach--5%
                        Head JV--5%
                      Ass’t Coach--4%

                      Cross Country
                     Head Coach—5%
                     Ass’t Coach—4%

*Additional assistant coach may be added when the participant-coach ratio goes over 50 to 1.

        7.7.4.3      High School Athletics – General

                  7.7.4.3.1          The weekly compensation for all high school
                                     coaches      will be determined by dividing the
                                     appropriate percentage of Class III, Step 8 on
                                     the salary schedule by 11 (average length of all
                                     sports seasons). All coaches will be paid for the
                                     recognized length of the season of the sport
                                     coached.

                   7.7.4.3.2         Three (3) or more days of practice/competition
                                     per week during spring or winter recess will be
                                     considered as one (1) week.

                   7.7.4.3.3         In CIF playoff competition, a week's pay will be
                                     received for each week the season is extended
                                     for team coaches in team sports (football,
                                     maximum of five) and for the individual coach in
                                     individual sports.

                   7.7.4.3.4         Coaches assigned to out-of-season practice will
                                     receive a maximum of three weeks of their
                                     normal weekly rate.

                   7.7.4.3.5         The High School Athletic Director, who may
                                     coach only one (1) sport each year, shall receive
                                          28                             SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                               six percent (6%) of Class III, Step 8, per
                          season                 of sport (fall, winter,
                          spring).

             7.7.4.3.6        The High School Athletic Trainer shall
                              receive six percent (6%) per sport season
                              (fall, winter, spring). The trainer may not be
                              a coach at the same time..

             7.7.4.3.7        A minimum of one (1) coach will be
                              provided for each CIF sport at each level in
                              which the school participates. Additional
                              coaches may be assigned when approved
                              by the Chief Academic Officer or designee.

             7.7.4.3.8        Coaches and Athletic Directors shall be
                              eligible for mileage reimbursement for
                              mileage pre-authorized by the site principal
                              or her/his designee.

             7.7.4.3.9        Each comprehensive high school shall be
                              allocated $5,000 per site to pay for spring
                              practice coaches in addition to football.
                              School sites would have the flexibility to
                              determine which sports would constitute
                              Spring Practice Programs.

             7.7.4.3.10       Coaches are guaranteed/entitled to a prep
                              period and a coaching period at the high
                              school level for any semester during which
                              they are coaching.

7.7.4.4   High School Athletics - (Basis Class III, Step 8)

              Badminton                Gymnastics
          Head Coach--5%            Head Coach--5%
          Ass’t Coach--4%           Ass’t Coach--4%
               Baseball                   Soccer
          Head Coach--5%            Head Coach--5%
          Ass’t Coach--4%           Ass’t Coach--4%
             Basketball                  Softball
          Head Coach--5%            Head Coach--5%
          Ass’t Coach--4%           Ass’t Coach--4%
          *Intramural--3%           *Intramural--3%
            Cross Country               Swimming
          Head Coach--5%            Head Coach--5%
          Ass’t Coach--4%           Ass’t Coach--4%
             Field Hockey                 Tennis
          Head Coach--5%            Head Coach--5%
          Ass’t Coach--4%           Ass’t Coach--4%
          *Intramural--3%

                             29                        SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                           Football                          Track
                       Head Coach--6%                  Head Coach--5%
                       Ass’t Coach--5%                 Ass’t Coach--4%



                            Golf                            Volleyball
                       Head Coach--5%                  Head Coach--5%
                                                       Ass’t Coach--4%
                                                       *Intramural--3%
                         Water Polo                         Wrestling
                       Head Coach--5%                  Head Coach--5%
                       Ass’t Coach--4%                 Ass’t Coach--4%

7.7.5        Co-Curricular Assignments (Basis Class II, Step 5)

        7.7.5.1        Elementary Co-Curriculum Assignments

                       a.         Choir Director:
                                 one school .................................. .04 per year
                                 two schools................................. .06 per year
                                 three schools .............................. .08 per year
                                 four schools ................................ .10 per year
                            (paid if there is no more than 30 minutes student
                            instructional time utilized per practice)

                  b.        Choir Accompanist ........................... .02 per year
                  c.        Instrumental Music:
                                one school .................................. .02 per year
                                two schools................................. .03 per year
                                three schools .............................. .04 per year
                                four schools ................................ .05 per year


                  d.        Grade Level Leaders ........................ .005 per year
                               (including a Special Education Team representative in
                               each elementary school with four or more RSP and/or
                               SDC classes)
                  e.        Supervision:
                            hourly rate of ..................................... .000444
                  f.        Elementary Student Government/
                            Counselor Advisor............................. .006 per year per site



         7.7.5.2 Intermediate Co-Curricular Assignments

                  a.        Drama Production ............................. .02 per year
                  b.        Journalism ........................................ .02 per year
                  c.        Instrumental Music:
                                Band ........................................... .01 per year
                                              30                                SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                                  Orchestra.................................... .01 per year
                       d.    Vocal Music....................................... .02 per year
                       e.    Yearbook .......................................... .02 per year
                       f.    Pep Squad ........................................ .02 per year
                       g.    Drill Team ........................................ .02 per year
                       h.    Drill Team/Pep Squad....................... .03 per year
                       i.    Academic Coaches
                             (Basis of Class III, Step 7) ................ .05 per year##
                       j.    Student Government
                                  Advisor........................................ .02 per year
                       k.    Tall Flags .......................................... .02 per year
                       l.    Intermediate Pentathlon - Each school shall be allocated
                             $6,600 annually. Each site, in cooperation with teachers
                             involved, determines distribution of funds.

               7.7.5.3 High School Co-Curricular Assignments

                       a.    Drama …………………………………..05 per year
                       b.    Journalism ........................................ .04 per year
                       c.    Yearbook .......................................... .04 per year
                       d.    Instrumental Music:
                                  Band ........................................... .05 per year
                                  Orchestra.................................... .01 per year
                       e.    Vocal Music....................................... .05 per year
                       f.    Forensics .......................................... .03 per year
                       g.    Drill Team ......................................... .025 per semester.**
                       h.    Pep Squad ........................................ .03 per semester.#
                       i.    Drill Team/Pep Squad....................... .055 per semester.
                       j.    Academic Coaches
                                  (Basis of Class III, Step 7) .......... .05 per year
                                     .............................................. .per coach##
                       k.    Dance Team .................................... .025 per semester.
                       l.    Tall Flags .......................................... .025 per semester.
                       m.    Senior Class Advisor
                              Comprehensive High School .......... .0145 per year per
               site
                              Alternative/Continuation High
                              School ............................................. .0072 per year per
site

        *The weekly pay for band instructor during CIF play-offs in football or basketball
shall equal that determined by 5% factor (same as assistant football coach).
        **The weekly pay for Drill Team during CIF play-offs in football or basketball
shall equal that determined by 4% factor (same as assistant coach in other sports).
        #The weekly pay for Pep Squad for CIF play-offs in football or basketball shall
equal that determined by 5% factor (same as assistant coach in football unless the Pep
Squad and Drill Team are assigned for the same unit member, then only the larger
stipend will be given).



                                              31                              SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
      ##Kiwanis Bowl, Orange County Academic Decathlon, Model U.N., Mock Trial
(one semester), Kiwanis Bowl, Spelling Bee (one semester), Math Team (one
semester).

      7.7.6   Extra-Curricular Assignments

              7.7.6.1 Compensation for assignments which start one hour after the
                      instructional day for the large majority of unit members on the
                      site shall be in accordance with the following schedule:

                      a.   Dance Supervision                        $22.91 per event*
                      b.   After-game Dance Supervision             $17.19 per event*
                      c.   Football Supervision                     $17.19 per event
                      d.   Basketball Supervision or Timekeeper
                           (Varsity and JV combined)                $22.91 per event
                      e.   Basketball Supervision or Timekeeper
                           (one game)                               $17.19 per event
                      f.   Rooter Bus Supervision                   $22.91 per event*
                      g.   Volleyball Supervision
                           (Varsity and JV combined)                $17.19 per event
                      h.   Wrestling Supervision or
                           Timekeeper                               $17.19 per event
                      i.   S.A. City Track Meet
                           Official                                 $22.91 per day
                           Starter                                  $68.66 per day
                                    *Student Body Account Funds
              7.7.6.2 Unit members shall receive the opportunity to volunteer for extra
                      curricular assignments. If assignments must be made, equity
                      among the staff shall be a goal. The list of both filled/unfilled
                      assignments shall remain posted throughout the school year.

      7.7.7   Factors/Stipends (prorated for less than full time)

              7.7.7.1 The following assignments shall receive a factor equal to the
                      stated percentage of each unit member's salary schedule
                      placement:    8%—Project Coordinator, Audiologist, Music
                      Technician; 4%—Psychometrist.

              7.7.7.2 The following assignments shall receive a stipend equal to 5%
                      of Class II, Step 5: Unit members credentialed and working in
                      areas identified by the District as areas of critical shortage.

              7.7.7.3 Teachers who are assigned to teach classes which meet the
                      qualifications as contained in the "K-12 Program for LEP
                      Students" adopted by the Board of Education on February 9,
                      1988, shall be compensated at the highest competency level
                      expected and for which they are qualified.

              The following stipends will be based on Class II, Step 5 under the
              qualifications and assignments as contained in the "K-12 Program for
                                        32                       SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                LEP Students" adopted by the Board of Education on February 9, 1988,
                and modified by Memorandum of Understanding between the
                Association and the District dated 8/12/92 and 7/27/93:

                 Certification or Authorization           % of Class II, Step 5
                             BCLAD                               5.0%
                              BCC                                5.0%
                              CLAD                               3.0%
                              LDS                                3.0%
                      SB 1969/395 SDAIE                          1.7%
                   SB 1969/395 ELD/SDAIE                         1.7%

      NOTE: Unit members with LDS Certificate as of April 12, 1988, shall remain at
      a stipend of $1,201.75 until the stipend of 3% exceeds that amount. Unit
      members who were "grandfathered" under the LDS program in 1984 will receive
      a stipend of 1%.

                          7.7.7.3.1.       Unit members working in assignments identified
                                           by the District as "preferring/requiring" a
                                           Bilingual/ELD certification/LEP          authorization
                                           (BCC, BCLAD, LDS, CLAD, SB 1969/395 SDAIE,
                                           or SB 1969/395 ELD/SDAIE) shall receive the
                                           appropriate stipend as in section 7.7.7.3 above.
                                           Other positions eligible for a stipend include
                                           resource teachers and other instructional staff
                                           who work with LEP students more than 50% of
                                           the time and are involved in direct primary
                                           language instruction in reading and/or English
                                           Language Development (ELD). Also included are
                                           support staff such as nurses, counselors,
                                           psychologists,      speech/language        specialists,
                                           outreach consultants, bilingual resource teachers,
                                           and positions for which a Bilingual/ ELD
                                           certification or authorization is preferred/required.

                          7.7.7.3.2        Bilingual/ELD Stipends

      Program                               Requirement               In-training with a Minimum of the
                                                                                  Following
                                          ELEMENTARY
      TBE K-5                                BCLAD                                     CLAD
                                               BCC                                      LDS
      TLC 3-5                                 BCLAD*                                   CLAD
                                              BCC*                                      LDS
                                              CLAD
Immersion English K-5                         CLAD                                     CLAD
                                               LDS
                                      SB 1969/395 ELD/SDAIE
                                          SECONDARY
      ELD 6-12                               BCLAD                                     CLAD
                                               BCC
                                              CLAD
                                               LDS


                                                  33                              SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
    Primary Language                        BCLAD                             CLAD
     Content 6-12**                          BCC                        SB 1969/395 SDAIE
     SDAIE Content                          BCLAD                             CLAD
       Class 6-12**                          BCC                              BCC
                                             CLAD
                                              LDS
                                       SB 1969/395 SDAIE
        Literacy 6-12                       BCLAD                           CLAD
                                             BCC                    SB 1969/395 ELD/SDAIE

*   BCC or BCLAD is required if the TLC contains students requiring primary language
    instruction. LDS or CLAD will be adequate if the teacher is teaming with a BBC or
    BCLAD teacher or if the teacher is in training for the BCLAD.

** Teachers must still work within their area of basic authorization.

          7.7.7.4.Unit members holding a Bilingual or ELD certification or authorization
          (BCC, BCLAD, LDS, CLAD, SB 1969/395 SDAIE, or SB 1969/395 ELD/SDAIE)
          but whose assignment is not one that otherwise qualifies for a Bilingual/ELD
          stipend shall receive an annual stipend of $500.

          7.7.7.5 Unit members applying for Bilingual or ELD certification or Authorization
          (BCC, BCLAD, LDS, CLAD, SB 1969/395 SDAIE, or SB 1969/395 ELD/SDAIE)
          shall be reimbursed for the testing fee upon verification of having passed the
          complete test and submission to the state for the appropriate certification.

          7.7.7.6 Bilingual/ELD stipends will be effective the first of the month following
          receipt of written verification of passing the test and following the receipt of
          verification of submission to the state for appropriate certification.

          7.7.7.7 District Curriculum Specialists shall receive an annual stipend equal to
          that paid mentor teachers.

7.7.8    Hourly Rate Factors

          7.7.8.1 Hourly Rate Factors - Hourly rates are established by multiplying the
          following factor times Class II, Step 5 of the salary schedule:

                    A   -       .000625
                    B   -       .000695
                    C   -       .000765
                    D   -       .000833
                    E   -       .000905
                    F   -       .000975

          7.7.8.2 Hourly Rates - Home Instruction

                   1st & 2nd year    .000687
                   3rd & 4th year    .000757
                   5th & 6th year    .000827
                   7th & add'l yr.   .000897

                                               34                       SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
7.7.8.3 Activities and Hourly Rate Factors - The following activities shall receive
        the hourly rate factors set forth:

                a. Curriculum Writing/Program Planning         B
                b. Staff Development Instructor                F
                c. Staff Development Participant               A
                d. Auditorium Supervisor                       A
                e. Saturday Work Program                       A
                f. ROP Instructor                              D
                g. Saturday School Program                     C
                h. Parent Education Instructor                 F
                i. 10th Grade Counseling                       C
                j. Talent Search Program                       C
                k. Adult Education                             C
                l. Test Administration                         C

7.7.8.4 Hourly ROP instructors (less than 4 hours) shall be paid on an hourly
        rate (D).     Instructors (4 hours or more daily) shall be placed
        appropriately on the salary schedule or remain at the hourly rate,
        whichever the unit member prefers. This election may be accomplished
        only once. In the case of new employees, it must be made at the time
        of employment. Employees electing the hourly rate will not be eligible
        for benefits.

7.7.8.5 The GATE school site Coordinator shall receive Factor A times the first
        semester identified count.

7.7.8.6 Conference Period Reimbursement - When a unit member is assigned
        by the Principal to use his/her conference period to act as a substitute
        teacher, then that unit member shall be paid an additional amount equal
        to Factor B.

        When students are divided among teachers in case no substitute is
        available, the daily contract substitute rate shall be divided among the
        teachers affected. If the substitute coverage is for part of the day, the
        daily contract substitute rate shall be divided among the teachers
        affected and by the proportion of the day which has been covered. All
        percentages of pay will be rounded off to the nearest tenth. If a
        kindergarten teacher is assigned by the principal to teach the opposite
        session (a.m. versus p.m.) that teacher shall receive two (2) hours at
        Factor B. If a task-oriented unit member at any school is required to
        substitute for a full day, the unit member shall be compensated for one
        hour at Factor B.

7.7.8.7 Summer School - Summer School teachers shall be paid at the rate of
        hourly Factor D for the time of assigned duties on site times their
        placement on the teacher's salary schedule as of June 1 preceding the
        assignment. Summer School extra-service assignments shall be paid at
        the rate of hourly factor D on the teacher's salary schedule in effect
        June 1 preceding the assignment. Special Education Intersession

                                    35                        SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
              (Summer School) shall be paid at the same rate as regular summer
              school.




      7.7.8.8 The hourly rate for extra services other than those specified in this
              Agreement shall be computed at the rate of Factor E times the unit
              members's contract salary at the time the extra service is rendered.
              Hourly salary deductions, if necessary, shall be made at the same rate.



                                   ARTICLE VIII

                             8.0 HOURS OF WORK
8.1   Work Year

      8.1.1   All unit members in traditional and single-cycle schedule schools
              shall render 180 student instructional days of service, in addition
              to two (2) duty days and three (3) mandatory staff development
              days. (The three (3) mandatory staff development days increased
              the teachers’ salary schedule by 1.5%, except for unit members
              listed in 8.1.1.1 below.) All unit members in multi-cycle year-round
              schedule schools shall render 175 student instructional days of
              service, in addition to two (2) duty days and three (3) mandatory
              staff development days. (The three mandatory staff development
              days increased the teachers' salary schedule by 1.5%, except for
              unit members listed in 8.1.1.1 below.) Annual salaries/calendars
              for unit members are not affected by differences in annual
              calendars. All school schedules must provide for at least a two-
              week winter recess and at least a one-week summer recess. The
              number of days in the multi-cycle calendar may vary. (Work days
              in 2006-2007 shall increase for all employees by one non-
              instructional duty day.)

              8.1.1.1   The work year for the term of this Agreement for task-
                        oriented personnel indicated below shall be in
                        accordance with the following:

                        8.1.1.1.1 Psychologists—187 days. (on a flexible duty
                                  schedule between July 1-June 30, as agreed
                                  between the unit member and his/her
                                  supervisor

                        8.1.1.1.2 High School Counselors and High School
                                  Nurses—200 days


                                        36                       SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
8.1.1.1.3 Intermediate   and    Continuation   School
          Counselors/ Intermediate School Nurses/High
          School and Intermediate School Librarians—
          190 days

8.1.1.1.4 High School Program Specialists-195 days

8.1.1.1.5 District Librarian—12 month position for a total
          of
          223 days

8.1.1.1.6 Three days must be utilized as regular work
          days or staff development as arranged between
          the       unit       member        and his/her
          principal/supervisor (applies to 8.1.1.1.2;
          8.1.1.1.3; 8.1.1.1.4; and 8.1.1.1.5).

8.1.1.1.7 Intermediate and High School Community Day
          Teachers—223 days




               37                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                  8.1.1.1.8 Additional days at their daily rate of pay may be
                            agreed upon between the unit member and his/her
                            supervisor with a written memo to that effect.

                  8.1.1.1.9 When additional days beyond those stated above
                            are assigned and compensatory time off is to be
                            provided, such assignments and compensatory
                            time off shall be by mutual agreement of the unit
                            member and administrator with a written memo to
                            that effect.

        8.1.1.2   Support staff calendar will contain the same number of days
                  as each cycle on the year-round calendar. Unit members on
                  support staff calendar prior to July 1, 1997 will receive a four
                  (4) day extension each year they remain on support staff
                  calendar.

8.1.2   A joint committee of the Association and the District will develop the
        calendars for the term of this Agreement no later than April 15 of the
        previous year except by mutual agreement.

8.1.3   Change of Calendar

        8.1.3.1    When the staff of a specific site or the District wishes to
                   implement a calendar change to a different District-approved
                   calendar, the following shall occur:

                  8.1.3.1.1 Representatives of all employees at a site and the
                            administration shall analyze the impact of the
                            proposed changes and develop written pros and
                            cons.

                  8.1.3.1.2 All employees shall be presented the analysis and
                            the pros and cons and given an opportunity to
                            discuss and offer input.

                  8.1.3.1.3 A secret ballot (prepared by the District and the
                            Association) vote shall be conducted among all
                            employees at a site.




                                   38                         SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                          8.1.3.1.4 District and Association representatives shall count
                                    the ballots. If 70% + 1 of the staff vote to change
                                    the calendar, the results of this vote and the parent
                                    input shall be submitted to Cabinet for review and
                                    considerations for approval.

                          8.1.3.1.5 If the Cabinet approves the site request to change
                                    the calendar, it shall be recommended to the
                                    Board for approval.
                          8.1.3.1.6 Parents shall be provided the same information
                                    and opportunity as stated in 8.1.3.1 (a) (b) (c)
                                    above.

                          8.1.3.1.7 If the calendar changes are approved, transfer
                                    priority shall be given to unit members who will be
                                    adversely affected.

       8.1.4   The specific dates for Open House, Back-to-School Night, and parent
               conferences shall be determined by the District. Alterations to these
               dates may be made by sites with mutual agreement between
               administration and a majority of site-assigned unit members. The site
               administration shall notify the District in writing no less than 20 duty
               days prior to the changes. The District shall, on a timely basis, forward a
               copy of all changes to the Association.

       8.1.5   Prorated sick leave shall be provided for those unit members working
               beyond a regular contract as follows:

                           Days Contract                                    Sick Leave
                            Extended                                         Earned
                                1-2                                             .1
                                3-4                                             .2
                                5-6                                             .3
                                7-8                                             .4
                                9-10                                            .5
                               11-12                                            .6
                               13-14                                            .7
                               15-16                                            .8
                               17-18                                            .9
                               19-20                                           1.0

8.2    Work Day

       8.2.1   Each unit member shall have at least a 30 minute duty-free, uninter-
               rupted lunch period exclusive of passing periods.

  8.2.2 It is the intent of the District and the Association that unit members shall
        perform such professional responsibilities as necessary to meet the needs of
        the educational program of the District. All planning periods are intended to be


                                           39                        SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
     used for teachers' preparation and are considered to be a professional
     obligation which shall be met at the site or other district facility.

8.2.3 The instructional day for unit members shall conform with the required
      minutes provided in Education Code, Section 46201. Additional minutes
      per year shall be used for instruction as follows:
           GRADES 1, 2, 3, 4, AND 5:          1200 MINUTES PER YEAR
           GRADES 6, 7, AND 8:                2000 MINUTES PER YEAR
           GRADES 9, 10, 11, AND 12:          300 MINUTES PER YEAR

     (These additional minutes are contingent upon the minutes required
     under Ed. Code revisions set forth in 1982-1983 [Longer Day-Longer
     Year--SB 813]. Grades 1-5/6-8/9-12 shall not be required to add minutes
     beyond those enumerated in Ed. Code 46201 in excess of 1200/2000/300
     unless required to do so in order to maintain state funding and then only
     to the extent required by law.) Prior to the start of school each year, sites
     may elect to use the added minutes listed above for site meetings, after
     staff discussions, by holding an election with secret balloting and a 70%
     (or more) approval. In the same manner, changes to the schedule may
     be made at mid year. The flexible duty day for each unit member,
     excluding the duty-free lunch, shall include the instructional day for each
     unit member as well as all those times when the unit member's presence
     is required for staff meetings, site functions (limited to the following:
     parent conferences, committee work, evaluation of student performance,
     open house, back-to-school night), and student supervision, with the
     stipulations listed below:

     8.2.3.1 Unit members shall not be required to supervise students during
             routine daily student arrivals/departures, or recesses/non instructional
             breaks (before, during, or after school).

     8.2.3.2 In general, unit members shall be required to attend staff meetings,
             faculty meetings, department meetings, site functions, student
             supervision, and other administratively-called meetings no more than
             two hours per month, excluding minimum day at waivered schools.
             This limitation does not include staff development, inservices,
             curriculum meetings, or other called meetings which shall be paid at
             their appropriate factors as listed in Article VII of this CBA unless they
             are taken from the additional instructional minutes per year.

     8.2.3.3 No administratively-called meetings shall take place either voluntarily
              or involuntarily on Tuesdays.

     8.2.3.4 The unit member shall be responsible for meeting all duties (as
              defined in this Article), whether required by the site administration or
              the State of California, relevant to their assignments. The unit
              member's flexible duty day shall be completed when their
              responsibilities have been met.

                                     40                           SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
 8.2.4 When any certificated employee is supervising a regular teacher's class (i.e.,
       music, art, physical education, counselors, etc.), the regular teacher shall be
       free to pursue professional duties elsewhere on site or other district facilities.

 8.2.5 The flexible duty day will be adjusted when night or weekend activities require
       attendance, or when tasks or assignments substantially extend the work day
       and/or work week. Back to School, Open House, and other school-wide
       parent-teacher meetings (other than PTAs and PTOs) are included in these
       activities. Alternative flexible duty day schedules may be made by unit
       members at the affected sites.

         8.2.5.1      School Site Councils shall set their own schedules and are not
                      subject to limitations of Article VIII.

8.2.6    The flexible duty day for unit members whose primary responsibilities are task-
         oriented shall normally be seven and one-half (7½) hours per day on site
         excluding lunch. Site is defined as: assigned location where tasks require
         work to be performed. With site administration approval and when students
         are not present on site, task-oriented unit members may complete their
         responsibilities at a location other than their site(s) if they have the necessary
         materials and equipment to enable them to do so. Examples: computers,
         Internet connections, software, telephones, access to student lists, and
         specific information.

         8.2.6.1      The unit members included under this section are: Counselors,
                      Librarians/Media Specialists, Nurses, Psychologists, Project
                      Assistants, Outreach Consultants, and other unit members
                      assigned duties other than instructing students.

 8.2.7    Required service rendered for student activities that extend one hour after the
          close of the normal instructional day for the large majority of unit members at
          that site shall be paid in accordance with wage rates in Article VII for that
          period of time beyond one hour after the close of the normal instructional day.
          Planning periods are considered "Instruction" under this Section.

 8.2.8    Each unit member shall daily indicate that he/she has reported for and left
          from duty. The method is to be determined by the site administrator with
          input from the staff.

         8.2.8.1      Unless otherwise directed or approved, on inservice, staff
                      development, or other duty days when assigned students are not
                      in attendance, unit members shall be expected to report to their
                      work assignment or other assigned location no later than they
                      would report if regular classes were in session with assigned
                      students.

 8.2.9    The site administrator shall determine the beginning and ending time for unit
          members included in 8.2.2 and 8.2.6.1. Flexible starting and ending times
          may be made by the principal for the convenience of individual unit members
          if the needs of the District continue to be served.

                                         41                           SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
               8.2.10 Kindergarten and Special Education Preschool teachers shall not be
                      required to be in direct contact with students beyond 300 minutes.

               8.2.11 The instructional day in year-round schedule schools will be adjusted
                      to be equitable with those in traditional schedule schools. Such
                      adjustment will include the addition of the number of minutes per day
                      listed below.

ADDITIONAL TOTAL MINUTES PER DAY
Grade Level        Minutes/Day          180        179   178   177   176      175      174
Kindergarten       1.1 minutes           0          2     3     4     5         6        7
Grades 1-3         1.6 minutes           0          2     4     5     7         8       10
Grades 4-5         1.7 minutes           0          2     4     6     7         9       10
Grades 6-12        2.0 minutes           0          2     4     6     8        10       12

               8.2.12 Duties may not be assigned during the common preparation period in
                      intermediate schools unless volunteers are first sought and unless
                      such assignments are made on an equitable basis with other staff.

8.3    Meetings/Activities

       8.3.1 Reasonableness shall prevail in calling required meetings and extending
             meetings (including Department meetings) beyond one hour after the end of
             the instructional day for the majority of unit members on that site. Whenever
             possible, reasonable efforts will be made to end meetings and activities
             involving unit members before dark.

       8.3.2   An extended meeting/activity is one which extends beyond the ending of the
               flexible duty day prescribed for the large majority of unit members on that
               site.

       8.3.3   The following would not be considered applicable to provisions under 8.3.1:

               8.3.3.1 Meetings or activities for which remuneration is being paid for the
                       general responsibilities (i.e., coaching, department chair meetings,
                       band and choral activities).

               8.3.3.2 Any meetings or activities not called by the administrator or District
                       personnel.

               8.3.3.3 Voluntary attendance at meetings and activities.

       8.3.4 Regular Education—Fourth and fifth grade teachers shall be provided an on-
             site release day each trimester for report card preparation, parent-teacher
             conferences, or preparation for their academic program. The schedule for
             release days shall be determined by the principal and the teachers involved.

       8.3.5 The utilization of new instructional models shall not be required of unit
             members assigned to special education positions until the District has


                                              42                           SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
              provided appropriate training regarding the use of such models and
              necessary materials.

8.4   Buy-Back Days

      8.4.1   Three professional growth days shall be mandatory attendance days. If a unit
              member is absent on a scheduled professional growth day, he/she shall
              attend an available District-scheduled make-up day/time or attend another
              school's staff development day/time with the approval of both site
              principals/supervisors. If the unit member's site principal does not approve a
              request to attend a particular site's make-up session, the site principal, upon
              request, shall provide a reason for non-approval. Attendance verifications
              shall be provided to unit members upon request. Failure to attend any
              mandatory professional growth day shall result in deducting, in the last
              paycheck, one day's pay for each day missed.

      8.4.2   Unit members beginning paid service after the start of the student school
              year shall attend professional growth days as follows:

              Beginning paid service during 1st trimester    =       3 mandatory days
              Beginning paid service during 2nd trimester    =       2 mandatory days
              Beginning paid service during 3rd trimester    =       1 mandatory day

      8.4.3   The resulting increase to the Teacher Salary Schedule (Article VII, Paragraph
              8.1.1) shall continue unless the state allowance for buy-back days is reduced
              or discontinued. If so, the salary schedule increase shall be reduced or
              discontinued accordingly, and the work year shall also be reduced
              accordingly.

      8.4.4   Stipends and other compensation based on the Teacher Salary Schedule
              shall be computed on the schedule without the professional growth increase.
              The District shall make a "stipend calculation salary schedule" available to
              unit members.

      8.4.5   Unit members and administrators at each site shall develop the staff
              development calendar prior to the end of the school year. Such site
              calendar shall be posted at the site with a copy to each site unit member
              and a copy sent to Human Resources. The Human Resources
              Department shall provide a copy to the Association in a timely manner.

      8.4.6   Staff development shall be site based within State and District guidelines.
              One of the three (3) days may be District directed.

      8.4.7   Unit members selected to present at inservices shall receive staff
              development credit for the hours of their presentations and shall receive a
              stipend for preparation equal to Factor F—one hour preparation for each hour
              of presentation.

      8.4.8   Make-up Days


                                            43                           SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
8.4.8.1   A preliminary calendar of make-up days/times shall be available at
          the District Curriculum and Staff Development Office and on the
          District Web Site prior to the end of the first semester. Updated
          make-up times and dates shall be made available and provided to
          the Association in a timely manner. Information regarding signing
          up for make-up sessions shall also be available at the District
          Curriculum and Staff Development office.

8.4.8.2   District and Association representatives shall meet for at least one
          meeting before January 1 to consult regarding the subjects, dates,
          and times for District provided make-up days.

8.4.8.3   The District shall provide the Association the names of unit
          members needing make-up days by March 1 of each year.
          Attendance at make-up days is the unit member’s
          responsibility.




                              44                           SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                                      ARTICLE IX

                                    9.0 CLASS SIZE

9.1   Average class size shall be determined on a building site basis and shall be per
      teacher of record as follows:

      9.1.1    The District will make a good faith effort to provide class sizes in grades
               one and two that are below the average class size as stated in (a)
               below.

               9.1.1.1      Elementary:                       31.0 students

               9.1.1.2      Intermediate:                     31.75 students

               9.1.1.3      High School:                      32.5 students

               9.1.1.4.     Opportunity/Continuation:         25.0 students

9.2   An analysis of average class size by schools shall be made no later than the end
      of the third week of school to identify schools exceeding the average class size.

      9.2.1     Class sizes for grades K-3 shall not exceed the limitations of
                Education Code Sections 41376 and 41378 (kindergarten=31; grades
                1-3=30). If a class is over the cap, the District will correct this as soon
                as possible but in no event shall the time for the correction exceed
                three weeks.

9.3   Individual class size may vary from the building site average due to such things
      as the following factors:

      9.3.1.    Special Program Funding Requirements

      9.3.2     High Transiency Rates

      9.3.3     Student Safety Requirements

      9.3.4     Traditional Large Group Instruction

      9.3.5     Experimental Classes

9.4   If the average class size increases to (or exceeds) the following, additional
      staffing unit(s) (equivalent of one teacher) shall be provided to be used for direct
      classroom assistance. The unit members affected shall be given the opportunity
      to make recommendations concerning the utilization of the additional staffing
      unit(s).

      9.4.1 Elementary:                     32.0 students

      9.4.2 Intermediate:                   32.75 students

                                             45                       SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
      9.4.3      High School:                     33.5 students

      9.4.4      Opportunity/Continuation:        26.0 students

      9.4.5      If any individual academic class enrollment exceeds the figures above
                 by three (3), and fifty percent (50%) or more of the students are LEP
                 students, serious consideration for additional assistance to the teacher
                 will be given.

      9.4.6 P.E. classes

              9.4.6.1      In the interest of safety and upon the written request of the
                           unit member, the District will provide relief to a P.E. class in
                           intermediate and/or high school if, after the first three weeks
                           of a semester, the verified attendance of the class exceeds
                           55 for a period of two weeks or more.

              9.4.6.2      The relief shall take the form of one or more of the following:
                           creation of an additional class, reduction of class size
                           through student program changes, or provision of aide
                           assistance to the class.

              9.4.6.3      Other forms of relief may be used in lieu of the above with
                           mutual agreement of the unit member and the site
                           administrator.

              9.4.6.4      Whenever actual class size within a given period is adjusted
                           by P.E. teachers themselves, depending on the type of
                           physical activity taught by each teacher, then these
                           provisions shall not apply.

9.5   The following shall not be utilized in determining average class size:

      9.5.1     Special Education teachers and their students (Special Day Classes)

      9.5.2     Special Education teachers and one-half (1/2) their students (Resource
                Specialist Program)

      9.5.3     Elementary Music Teachers

      9.5.4     Psychologists and Psychometrists

      9.5.5     Speech/Language Specialists

      9.5.6     Counselors (unless teaching)

      9.5.7     Nurses

      9.5.8     Reading Specialist Teachers

                                             46                       SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
      9.5.9         Librarians and Media Specialists

      9.5.10        Bilingual Resource Teachers

      9.5.11        Any categorically-funded unit member.

      9.5.12        Twenty-to-one (20-to-1) ratio classes created as authorized by state
                    legislation.

9.6   If non-bilingual class sizes are above that stipulated in 9.1.1 above, the District
      shall make a good faith effort to provide help for those classes if the increase
      was caused by small bilingual classes in that grade level in that school.

9.7   Staffing ratios for Special Education classes and teachers will not exceed the
      legal maximums.

      9.7.1         If classes at Mitchell Child Development Center and/or Taft Hearing
                    Impaired Program are taught by split sessions, the total number of
                    students shall be the total in both sessions and shall be considered as
                    one class. (Example: 16 students total: 8 students served in early
                    session and 8 students served in late session.)

9.8   The District shall establish a class size problem resolution committee at each
      level (elementary, intermediate, and high school) to study and suggest methods
      of relief in buildings to reduce split-grade classes, to reduce the impact of low
      enrollment classes, to allow for large group or experimental instruction, and/or
      team teaching.

      9.8.1         Relief may take the form of one or more of the following:

               a.       Creation of an additional class
               b.       Reduce class size through student program changes
               c.       Provide aide assistance to the class
               d.       Other forms of relief may be suggested in lieu of the above.

9.9   The District and Association by May 1, 2000, will conduct a secondary class-by-
      class/site-by-site assessment based on enrollment figures with a goal of
      understanding the reasons for class size reductions where educationally and
      financially feasible. These figures and the results of this study, along with
      recommendations if any for secondary class size reduction, will be submitted to
      the bargaining teams by May 30, 2000. These results and recommendations will
      be referred back to the bargaining teams and considered for implementation in
      the 2000-2001 school year.




                                              47                         SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                                    ARTICLE X

                           10.0 ABSENCES/LEAVES

10.1   Definitions

       10.1.1   An "absence" is an authorization for a unit member to be absent
                from duty for a period of time not to exceed 20 duty days.
                (Exception: illness absence and maternity absence -- see
                appropriate section.)

       10.1.2   "Leaves" are those absences extending for a period of 21 duty
                days or more.

       10.1.3   "Illness absence" means illness, injury or physical disability or
                quarantine of the unit member.

       10.1.4   Members of the immediate family means the mother, father,
                foster parents, legal guardians, grandmother, grandfather,
                grandchildren or great-grandchildren of the unit member or of the
                spouse of the unit member, and the spouse, son, son-in-law,
                daughter, daughter-in-law, brother or sister of the unit member,
                and brothers and sisters of the unit member's spouse, or any
                relative permanently living in the immediate household of the unit
                member, only surviving blood relative, domestic partner.

10.2   Absences

       10.2.1 General Provisions:

                10.2.1.1 A unit member who is absent from work other than for
                those days as authorized by State law or provisions of this
                Agreement is taking an unauthorized absence in breach of
                contract and in violation of the Agreement. Such unauthorized
                absence is subject to disciplinary action including dismissal.

                10.2.1.2 Absence requests shall be made prior to the absence
                unless circumstances preclude the procedure.

       10.2.2 Maternity

                10.2.2.1   Employees covered by this agreement shall be
                           entitled to use personal illness leave (sick leave) as
                           set forth in this agreement for disabilities caused or
                           contributed to by pregnancy, miscarriage, childbirth,
                           and recovery therefrom on the same terms and



                                       48                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
           conditions governing leave of absence for other
           illnesses, injuries, or medical disabilities. Such leave
           shall not be used for child care, child rearing or
           preparation for childbearing, but shall be limited to
           those disabilities caused or contributed to by
           pregnancy, miscarriage, childbirth, or recovery
           therefrom.

10.2.2.2   An employee who is pregnant may continue in active
           employment as late into her pregnancy as she
           desires, provided she is able to perform her required
           duties and responsibilities and has submitted the
           necessary doctor's certificate.

10.2.2.3   The length of such pregnancy disability leave,
           including the date on which the employee's duties
           with the District are to be resumed, shall be
           determined by the employee and the employee's
           physician.

10.2.2.4   Employees shall be entitled to leave without pay or
           other benefits for disabilities caused or contributed to
           by pregnancy, miscarriage, childbirth, or recovery
           therefrom, when all current, accumulated and
           differential sick leave has been exhausted. The date
           on which the employee shall resume duties shall be
           determined by the employee on leave and the
           employee's physician; provided, however, that the
           District management may require a verification of the
           extent of disability.

10.2.2.5   This leave policy shall be construed as requiring the
           Board of Education to grant leave with pay only when
           it is necessary to do so in order that leaves of
           absence for disabilities caused or contributed to by
           pregnancy, miscarriage, or childbirth be treated the
           same as leaves for other illnesses, injuries, or
           disabilities.

10.2.2.6   An employee on pregnancy disability leave for one
           semester or less shall be entitled to return to the
           same assignment held at the time such leave
           commenced, unless such assignment has been
           discontinued, in which case the employee shall be
           entitled to a comparable assignment. An employee
           on pregnancy disability leave for more than one



                       49                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
           semester shall be entitled to return to an assignment
           comparable to the assignment held at the time such
           leave commenced. In any case, the assignment of
           the employee upon return to work shall be
           comparable to that held at the time pregnancy
           disability began.      "Comparable" means same
           educational level (primary, upper elementary, middle
           school or secondary) and also means immediate
           assignment within major and/or minor teaching fields
           whenever possible, except by request of the
           employee and subject to availability of the position.

10.2.2.7   Whenever the District determines that it may be
           appropriate to require additional verification of the
           extent of any of the disabilities referred to above, said
           verification shall be achieved through one of the
           following two (2) methods—the option to be exercised
           by the affected employee; in the event the employee
           does not exercise an option upon request, the District
           may proceed with procedure A below:

           A.     District management may require a verification
           of the extent of disability through a physical
           examination of an employee by a physician appointed
           by the District, at District expense; or

           B.      An additional medical examination shall be
           conducted by the employee's physician at District
           expense. In the event the employee chooses to
           exercise this option, the employee's physician
           verification shall contain the following language:

           I understand that my verification of disability is to be
           used for the expenditure of public funds. I have read
           the foregoing verification of disability and declare
           under penalty of perjury that it is true and correct.

           Executed this                       day of
                                        , 20     at

           , California,

           County.




                           50                  SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
         10.2.2.8   Unit members may use fifteen (15) days of
                    accumulated sick days for the birth or adoption of a
                    child. (Does not apply to the mother in natural birth.)

         10.2.2.9   A unit member may request up to three (3) days a
                    year for paternity absence. The unit member shall
                    have the amount paid a substitute employee
                    deducted from the salary. This request may be in
                    addition to a request under 10.2.5.2.

10.2.3 Illness

         10.2.3.1   At the beginning of each school year, each unit
                    member shall be credited with one (1) sick day per
                    month to be worked.          Unit members working
                    year-round school will earn the same number of sick
                    days as a unit member will earn in the traditional
                    school year.

                    10.2.3.1.1    A month of service is at least 75% of the
                                  duty days in that month.

                    10.2.3.1.2    A unit member who works 50% or more
                                  but less than 75% of the duty days in a
                                  month shall earn ½ sick day.

                    10.2.3.1.3    The District shall provide a summary of
                                  accumulated sick leave to all unit
                                  members.

         10.2.3.2   Sick days may be used by a unit member for personal
                    illness, injury, physical disability, or quarantine.
                    Beginning with July 1, 2000, a unit member may
                    annually use six (6) sick leave days for the illness of a
                    child, parent, or spouse.

                    10.2.3.2.1    After accrued sick days are exhausted,
                                  and if a unit member is absent from
                                  duties because of illness or accident for
                                  a period of 100 duty days or less, the
                                  amount deducted from the salary due
                                  for any month in which the absence
                                  occurred shall not exceed the sum
                                  which is normally paid a substitute
                                  employee.




                                 51                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
        10.2.3.3   All sick day benefits must be claimed within each
                   payroll reporting period by filing a unit member
                   absence card.

        10.2.3.4   Signature certification of the unit member is required
                   for absences not exceeding six (6) consecutive duty
                   days.

        10.2.3.5   If a pattern of absences exists or if there is
                   reasonable cause to believe that the unit member is
                   abusing the use of sick days, the Human Resources
                   Office may require the unit member to provide
                   additional certification of such absences.

        10.2.3.6   A written statement of absence day(s) and reason(s)
                   for absence by a duly licensed physician for absences
                   more than six (6) consecutive duty days, or
                   acceptable evidence of treatment and the need
                   therefore by the practitioner of the religion of any
                   well-recognized church or denomination, shall be
                   required in each payroll reporting period.

        10.2.3.7   The absence card shall indicate the days of absence,
                   the reason(s) for the absence(s), and the unit
                   member's signature.

        10.2.3.8   The immediate supervisor's signature designating
                   approval is required in order for the unit member to
                   receive pay.

        10.2.3.9   The District shall provide each unit member with
                   verification of accumulated sick days by November 1.

10.2.4 Personal Necessity/Compelling Absence

        10.2.4.1   Bargaining unit members shall be allowed no more
                   than seven (7) days of accumulated sick leave for
                   purposes of personal necessity/compelling absence.
                   Such days may be taken when: (a) the need for
                   absence is beyond the unit member's immediate
                   control, (b) it presents an unavoidable conflict with
                   duty hours, and (c) the unit member has no
                   reasonable alternative.

                   The unit member will provide advance notice of
                   absence to his/her supervising administrator unless



                               52                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                     extenuating circumstances exist. Reasons for such
                     absence need not be provided, but shall comply with
                     the limitations in 10.2.4 (a), (b), and (c).

10.2.5 Excused Absence

        10.2.5.1     Without Loss of Pay: Upon request a unit member
                     may be excused for an occasional absence up to a
                     maximum of two (2) hours for a change in assignment
                     or personal business when such absence from
                     regular duty is deemed in the best interest of the
                     District and the unit member and of such nature that it
                     requires the presence of the unit member during the
                     working day (e.g. medical or dental appointment,
                     religious observance, funeral of close friend).

        10.2.5.2     Partial Loss of Pay: A unit member may request up
                     to two (2) days a year for personal absence with loss
                     of pay equal to that normally paid a substitute.

                     10.2.5.2.1    The request shall be made to the
                                   immediate    supervisor      at    least
                                   twenty-four (24) hours in advance
                                   unless an emergency (serious illness of
                                   members of immediate family) makes
                                   such advance notification impossible.

                     10.2.5.2.2    In the event the immediate supervisor
                                   denies the absence, the unit member
                                   may request a review by the appropriate
                                   Division Superintendent, whose decision
                                   shall take place prior to the date re-
                                   quested for the personal leave day.

10.2.6 Bereavement

        10.2.6.1     Each unit member shall be granted three (3) duty
                     days of paid absence, or five (5) duty days if out of
                     state or travel of more than 250 miles one way is
                     involved, for each bereavement due to the death of
                     any member of his/her immediate family. Verification
                     of death of member of immediate family and travel
                     distance may be required by the District.

10.2.7 Jury Duty, Court Appearance Under Subpoena




                                  53                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
         10.2.7.1    A unit member shall be entitled to as many days of
                     paid absence as are necessary for appearance for
                     jury duty or court appearance under subpoena,
                     except where the subpoena supports a bargaining
                     unit member’s action against the District (voluntary
                     service on Grand Jury not included).

         10.2.7.2    The daily jury stipend, less mileage and parking
                     allowance if given, shall be paid to the District.

         10.2.7.3    A verification (court order, subpoena, etc.) shall be
                     required proof of the need for such attendance.

         10.2.7.4    Unit members who are released from jury duty or
                     court appearance under subpoena at or before
                     10:00 a.m. will report to their assignments for the
                     remainder of the day.

         10.2.7.5    A unit member who is the victim of a crime or
                     domestic violence may utilize days of paid absence to
                     appear in court if such is necessary.

                     10.2.7.5.1    Advance notice is required except in the
                                   case of extenuating circumstances.

                                   10.2.7.5.2   Verification of appearance
                                   from the court is required.

10.2.8 Industrial Accident or Illness

         10.2.8.1    A unit member who serves the Santa Ana Unified
                     School District shall be entitled to an occupational
                     accident or occupational illness leave of absence not
                     to exceed sixty (60) duty days during which time
                     schools of the District are required to be in session or
                     when the unit member would otherwise have been
                     performing work for the District in any one fiscal year
                     for the same accident.

                     10.2.8.1.1    The unit member shall notify the
                                   immediate supervisor of the injury/
                                   illness within 24 hours.

                     10.2.8.1.2    If the injury/illness results in lost time
                                   from work the District may require the
                                   unit member to submit to a physical



                                  54                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                         examination by a physician selected by
                         the District at any time during the
                         absence period. The expense of the
                         physical shall be borne by the District.

10.2.8.2   The following rules shall apply:

           10.2.8.2.1    Allowable absence shall not           be
                         accumulated from year to year.

           10.2.8.2.2    Occupational injury or illness absence
                         shall commence on the first day of
                         absence.

           10.2.8.2.3    When a person employed in a position
                         requiring certification qualifications is
                         absent from assigned duties on account
                         of an occupational injury or illness, the
                         person shall be paid such portion of the
                         salary due him/her for any month in
                         which the absence occurs as, when
                         added to the person's temporary
                         disability indemnity, will result in a
                         payment of not more than the person's
                         full salary.

           10.2.8.2.4    Occupational injury or illness absence
                         shall be reduced by one day for each
                         day of authorized absence regardless of
                         a disability indemnity award.

           10.2.8.2.5    When an occupational injury or illness
                         absence extends into the next fiscal
                         year, the unit member shall be entitled
                         to only the amount of unused absence
                         due for the same illness or injury.

10.2.8.3   Upon termination of the occupational injury or illness
           absence benefit, the unit member shall be entitled to
           the other benefits provided in this Agreement and for
           the purposes of each of these sections, the absence
           shall be deemed to have commenced on the date of
           termination of the occupational injury or illness
           absence benefit, and entitlement or other sick leave
           will then be used; but if a unit member is receiving
           Workers' Compensation the unit member shall be



                        55                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                           entitled to use only so much of the person's
                           accumulated or available sick leave, or other
                           available leave which, when added to the Workers'
                           Compensation award will result in a payment of not
                           more than the full salary.

                10.2.8.4   During any paid absence, the District in turn shall
                           issue the unit member appropriate salary warrants for
                           payment of the unit member's salary and shall deduct
                           normal retirement and other authorized contributions.

                10.2.8.5   Any unit member receiving benefits as a result of this
                           regulation shall, during periods of injury or illness,
                           remain within the state of California unless the District
                           authorizes travel outside the state.

                10.2.8.6   Any unit member who has been off work as the result
                           of an occupational injury or illness shall have a signed
                           release from the physician, duly licensed, prior to re-
                           turning to work.

                           10.2.8.6.1    Limited capacity releases from the treat-
                                         ing physician are acceptable for return
                                         to work only if the immediate supervisor
                                         advises the Human Resources Office, in
                                         writing, that the specified limitations will
                                         not prohibit the unit member from
                                         performing the major responsibilities of
                                         the position.

                           10.2.8.6.2    If it is determined that a unit member
                                         with a limited capacity release cannot
                                         perform regular assigned duties, the
                                         District may assign the unit member to
                                         another District position until a full
                                         release is granted. Nothing herein shall
                                         be interpreted or applied to require the
                                         District to make such assignment or to
                                         create a light duty position.

10.3   Leaves

       10.3.1 Parental

                10.3.1.1   In cases of expected maternity, paternity, adoption or
                           child rearing, the certificated employee involved may



                                        56                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                   secure a leave of absence, without pay, not to exceed
                   one school year, at the end of which the employee
                   shall be reemployed at a comparable position and, if
                   possible, the same position, provided that the
                   employee shall not have an employment status
                   greater than that which the employee would have
                   enjoyed if the employee would not have been on
                   leave. Leave for child rearing is limited to a child five
                   (5) years old or less.

        10.3.1.2   No compensation or fringe benefits, unless paid by
                   the employee, shall be paid to an employee while on
                   parental leave. During such a leave, a teacher shall
                   maintain, but not add to, sick leave or other employee
                   benefits, including seniority, accumulated prior to
                   such leave.

        10.3.1.3   Upon request, an eligible unit member shall be
                   granted four (4) months leave without pay for the birth
                   or adoption of a child of the unit member (see
                   10.3.2.2 below).

10.3.2 Family Care and Medical Leave

        10.3.2.1   Upon request, the District may provide a unit member
                   an unpaid leave not to exceed one (1) year for the
                   purpose of meeting responsibilities involving
                   members of the immediate family.

        10.3.2.2   Upon request, Family Care and Medical Leave for up
                   to four (4) months without pay shall be granted to an
                   eligible unit member within any twelve- (12) month
                   period.


                   10.3.2.2.3    A health care provider's verification of a
                                 serious illness or serious health
                                 condition shall be provided by the
                                 employee at the time a request for leave
                                 is    filed   with     the      Assistant
                                 Superintendent-Human Resources.

                   10.3.2.2.4    "Serious health condition" means an
                                 illness, injury, impairment, or a physical
                                 or mental condition which requires the




                                57                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                                   unit members's presence to care for
                                   his/her child, spouse, or parent.

                     10.3.2.2.5    No Family Care and Medical Leave shall
                                   be granted if an undue hardship would
                                   be created regarding the operation of
                                   the District. The District shall consider
                                   alternative means to alleviate the
                                   situation.

                     10.3.2.2.6    Health benefits as provided to active
                                   employees shall be provided during the
                                   first twelve (12) weeks of such leave.

10.3.3 Health

         10.3.3.1    The District shall consider granting a unit member,
                     upon request of the unit member's medical advisor,
                     an unpaid leave for health reasons. The District may
                     require a statement by the District's selected
                     physician to the effect that such leave is necessary.
                     The physician's cost shall be borne by the District.

10.3.4 Professional Development

         10.3.4.1    The District may grant a unit member an unpaid leave
                     of absence of one (1) year (renewable with permis-
                     sion for an additional year) to pursue a District-
                     approved program of professional development which
                     may include, but not be limited to, additional
                     schooling and/or training, research, participation in
                     faculty exchange programs, or travel related to the
                     unit member's present assignment.

                     10.3.4.1.1    Other leaves of absence shall be con-
                                   sidered if they are related to the educa-
                                   tional needs and/or programs of the
                                   District.

10.3.5 Legislative

         10.3.5.1    A unit member who is elected to the State Legislature
                     shall be granted an unpaid leave of absence for the
                     length of his/her term or terms of office. A permanent
                     unit member elected to other government posts may




                                  58                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                    also be granted an unpaid leave of absence for the
                    length of his/her term or terms of office.

10.3.6 Sabbatical

         10.3.6.1   At the discretion of the District, a sabbatical leave
                    may be granted for the purpose of professional
                    improvement and the development of material which
                    will benefit the students of the Santa Ana Unified
                    School District. This purpose may be achieved by
                    one of the following or a combination of the following:

                    10.3.6.1.1    Academic Study

                                  10.3.6.1.1.1 The unit member pursues a
                                               program of studies as a
                                               full-time student in an
                                               accredited institution of
                                               higher learning. "Full-time"
                                               status shall be verified in
                                               writing by the registrar's
                                               office of the institution
                                               attending.

                    10.3.6.1.2    Independent Research

                                  10.3.6.1.2.1 A leave related to the
                                               present    or     prospective
                                               service. The program must
                                               be at least equivalent in
                                               effort and content to the
                                               required units as pursued
                                               in 10.3.6.1.1. A complete
                                               plan for such study must be
                                               approved and filed with the
                                               original application.

                    10.3.6.1.3    Travel

                                  10.3.6.1.3.1 The unit member shall
                                               remain in travel status
                                               three and one-half (3½)
                                               months for each semester
                                               of leave granted.




                                 59                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
10.3.6.2   General Provisions

           10.3.6.2.1    Eligibility. Unit members meeting the
                         following criteria may, at the discretion
                         of the District, be granted a leave once
                         in every eight (8) years.

                         10.3.6.2.1.1 Achieved           permanent
                                      status.

                         10.3.6.2.1.2 Possession    of     a valid
                                      regular             California
                                      credential.

                         10.3.6.2.1.3 Completion of seven (7)
                                      consecutive     years   of
                                      successful service in the
                                      District.  A full year of
                                      service shall consist of
                                      seventy-five percent (75%)
                                      of the school year.

                         10.3.6.2.1.4 An approval by a physician
                                      that the unit member is in
                                      good physical condition
                                      shall     be      required.
                                      Expenses incurred will be
                                      the responsibility of the
                                      unit member.

           10.3.6.2.2    Length of leave

                         10.3.6.2.2.1 Sabbatical leaves shall be
                                      granted for not less than
                                      one (1) full semester or
                                      more than two (2) con-
                                      secutive         semesters.
                                      Leave for a fractional part
                                      of a semester is not
                                      permitted. In the case of
                                      year-round schools, an
                                      academic study leave may
                                      be requested by unit
                                      members on columns I, II,
                                      and III for one (1) quarter.




                        60                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
              10.3.6.2.2.2 Any certificated employee
                           eligible   for   sabbatical
                           leave who requests such
                           leave during the second
                           semester of any school
                           year must have completed
                           a minimum of seventy-five
                           percent (75%) of the days
                           that school is in session
                           the first semester of that
                           school year.

10.3.6.2.3    Application

              10.3.6.2.3.1 Sabbatical leave appli-
                           cations shall be submitted
                           prior to November 10 of
                           the year preceding the
                           school year for which the
                           leave       is     desired.
                           Requests for leaves for the
                           second semester shall be
                           submitted prior to the last
                           duty day of the year
                           preceding that for which
                           leave is desired.

              10.3.6.2.3.2 The application form is to
                           be submitted to the
                           Assistant Superintendent,
                           Human Resources, who
                           will establish the eligibility
                           of the candidate. It will
                           then be forwarded to the
                           principal for approval and
                           then returned to the Office
                           of    Human      Resources
                           Division.

              10.3.6.2.3.3 Qualifying      applicants'
                           forms shall be forwarded
                           to the Sabbatical Leave
                           Application Panel.

              10.3.6.2.3.4 The Sabbatical Leave
                           Application Panel shall



             61                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
              consist of seven (7)
              members. The members
              shall be four (4) tenured
              teachers appointed by the
              Association and three (3)
              administrators appointed
              by the Superintendent or
              his designee. One of the
              administrators shall be
              appointed by the Superin-
              tendent or his designee to
              serve as chairperson of
              the panel. The panel shall
              review     all   qualifying
              applications and forward
              them to the Division
              Superintendent with a
              recommendation.        The
              composition of the panel
              (grade level or position
              held) may be adjusted to
              reflect   the   applicant's
              assignment.

 10.3.6.2.3.5 The Assistant Superinten-
              dent, appropriate division,
              will review all sabbatical
              leave applications con-
              sidering:    (a)    Relative
              merits of reasons for
              desiring leave; (b) Direct
              benefit to the District; (c)
              The number of previous
              sabbatical leaves granted
              the applicant; (d) Seniority
              of service in the District;
              (e) Reasonable distribution
              of applicants in the various
              segments of the district.
              Following review of the
              applicants, the Assistant
              Superintendent will make
              his recommendations to
              the Superintendent.




62                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
10.3.6.2.4    Approval

              10.3.6.2.4.1 Upon the approval of the
                           Board of Education, the
                           Human           Resources
                           Division will prepare the
                           necessary contract and
                           see that all required
                           signatures are properly
                           affixed and that any other
                           pre-leave     requirements
                           are met.

10.3.6.2.5    Concerning Retirement

              10.3.6.2.5.1 Sabbatical leave shall
                           count toward retirement,
                           and the retirement con-
                           tributions     shall      be
                           deducted from warrants in
                           the usual manner. (Edu-
                           cation     Code,     Section
                           22803)

10.3.6.2.6    Rate and Conditions of Compensation

              10.3.6.2.6.1 A unit member who
                           receives    a   sabbatical
                           leave     approval    shall
                           receive his/her regular
                           salary less 83% of Class I,
                           Step 1.

              10.3.6.2.6.2 The unit member may
                           elect to continue the main-
                           tenance of his/her benefits
                           or receive that amount
                           paid by the District for
                           his/her benefits as salary.

              10.3.6.2.6.3 Compensation for any
                           employment accepted as
                           part of the sabbatical
                           leave program must not
                           exceed the difference
                           between the regular salary



             63                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                           the employee would have
                           received     had   he/she
                           remained on duty and the
                           salary he/she receives for
                           sabbatical leave.

              10.3.6.2.6.4 Sabbatical leaves shall
                           count as a regular period
                           of service and shall not
                           interrupt the unit member's
                           progress on the salary
                           schedule.

10.3.6.2.7    Method of Payment

             10.3.6.2.7.1 Two plans are made avail-
                          able from which an em-
                          ployee may select his/her
                          preference:               (1)
                          Compensation granted by
                          the Board of Education to
                          the employee on leave may
                          be paid in two equal annual
                          installments during the first
                          two years of service ren-
                          dered in the employ of the
                          District following the return
                          of the employee from the
                          leave         of     absence
                          (Education Code, Section
                          44969); (2) Salary for
                          sabbatical leave will be
                          paid to the employee while
                          on leave of absence in the
                          same manner as if the
                          employee were teaching in
                          the District upon the
                          furnishing by the employee
                          of a suitable bond indemni-
                          fying the District against
                          loss in the event that the
                          employee fails to render at
                          least two (2) years of
                          service in the Santa Ana
                          Unified School District after
                          return     from   leave of



             64                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                          absence. The employee
                          should make arrangements
                          with the Business Office for
                          the disposition of his/her
                          salary warrant each month.

                   a.     Written appointment of a
                          bank or depository to
                          receive his/her salary,

                                       or

                   b.     Disposition according to an
                          appropriate     or      fully
                          executed      power       of
                          attorney.

                          When death prevents the
                          employee from fulfilling
                          his/her leave requirements,
                          no repayment of salary will
                          be required of his/her
                          estate.

10.3.6.2.8    Status upon Returning from Sabbatical
              Leave and Required Report

              10.3.6.2.8.1 At the expiration of the
                           sabbatical     leave,    the
                           certificated employee who
                           has been granted such
                           leave shall be reinstated,
                           unless     he/she     agrees
                           otherwise, in the position
                           that is in the best interest
                           of the District. The pro-
                           visions of Education Code,
                           Section 44973 shall be
                           waived upon acceptance
                           of the leave. The District
                           shall make a good faith
                           effort to reinstate the unit
                           member in the position
                           held at the time the leave
                           was granted.




             65                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
 10.3.6.2.8.2 Each employee who has
              been on sabbatical leave
              shall file with the Division
              Superintendent the com-
              pleted material that was
              agreed to at the time the
              leave was approved not
              later than thirty (30) duty
              days after return to his
              assigned duty. In addition,
              a report shall be filed
              giving specific information
              on employment accepted
              and           compensation
              received therefrom during
              the period of the sabbat-
              ical leave.       All such
              material shall then be pre-
              sented to the Board of
              Education for approval.
              Transcripts of college and
              university work shall be
              supplied the District.

 10.3.6.2.8.3 Payment          for      service
              rendered after return to
              duty cannot be made until
              either (1) these documents
              are filed with the Superin-
              tendent and approved by
              the Board of Education, or
              (2) a statement is filed that
              the employee is not going
              to      fulfill    the     leave
              requirements.          If leave
              requirements         are      not
              fulfilled, no compensation
              may be paid for such leave
              and             any         such
              compensation            received
              must be refunded.

 10.3.6.2.8.4 In all matters in which this
              Section is in conflict with
              the Education Code, the
              provisions       of      the



66                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                                                      Education     Code     shall
                                                      prevail.

10.4   General Provisions

       10.4.1      A condition of each leave is that the credential or permit held
                   at the time the leave was granted, properly authorizing
                   service, must be maintained in full force by the unit member.

       10.4.2      Only permanent unit members are eligible to apply for an
                   unpaid leave (exception: Family Care and Medical Leave).

       10.4.3      All leave requests shall carry a statement of recommendation
                   by the immediate supervising administrator with reasons
                   therefore.

       10.4.4      All requests shall be considered by the Deputy
                   Superintendent and the Superintendent prior to submitting to
                   the Board of Education.

       10.4.5      Generally, leaves shall be a minimum of one (1) semester
                   and a maximum of two (2) semesters and will begin and end
                   on semester dates.       Unusual circumstances may be
                   considered to waive this requirement (e.g., "year-round
                   school"). Upon written request, consideration will be given to
                   extending unpaid leaves to a maximum of two years.

       10.4.6      A unit member on unpaid leave must serve at least 75% of
                   the duty days required for that year in order to receive credit
                   for one year's experience.

       10.4.7      At the end of the leave, the District shall make a good faith
                   effort to assign the returning unit member to a position which
                   was held at the time the leave was granted.

       10.4.8      Unless circumstances preclude, all leave applications must
                   be submitted ten (10) weeks prior to the beginning of the
                   leave (except for Family Care and Medical Leave).

       10.4.9      The unit member on leave must notify the Human Resources
                   Office before March 10 for Traditional Calendar and February
                   10 for Year-Round school of his/her intention to return to the
                   District at the expiration of the leave or resign from the
                   District. On semester leaves, the above date shall be
                   November 1 for Traditional Calendar and October 1 for
                   Year-Round school. The District will deem that the unit



                                       67                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                  member has abandoned employment if he/she fails to notify
                  the Human Resources Office as required.

       10.4.10    After a leave has been approved, the District is under no
                  obligation to return the unit member to service sooner than
                  the ending date of the leave.

       10.4.11    No leave shall be recommended unless the Assistant
                  Superintendent, Human Resources, has determined that a
                  competent replacement is available.

       10.4.12    A unit member on leave shall have the option to continue any
                  health benefits negotiated in this Agreement at his/her own
                  expense. Payments for these benefits shall be made in
                  advance to cover a six- (6) month span of time. Unit
                  members on leave may elect to pay monthly for benefits, at
                  102% of the monthly cost basis.

       10.4.13    Extension of leaves, upon request, shall be at the discretion
                  of the District.

10.5   Other Leaves and Absences

       10.5.1     A request for any leave or absence not covered by the terms
                  of this Agreement may be considered by the District on an
                  individual basis (e.g., Professional Conference Absence,
                  National Voluntary Service Leave).

10.6   Catastrophic Leave

       10.6.1     Catastrophic leave shall be defined as a life-threatening
                  serious illness or injury that incapacitates a unit member in
                  excess of fifteen (15) consecutive duty days. A physician's
                  verification that the illness or injury is life-threatening shall be
                  provided.

       10.6.2     To be eligible for catastrophic leave, the unit member shall
                  have exhausted all fully paid sick leave.

       10.6.3     A unit member shall not be eligible for catastrophic leave
                  during the period of time the unit member is receiving full pay
                  under Industrial Accident or Illness Leave (10.2.8).

       10.6.4     Only full-time unit members with eight (8) or more days of
                  accumulated sick leave shall be permitted to donate days
                  toward catastrophic leave.



                                       68                       SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
       10.6.5       The Association shall establish a Catastrophic Leave Bank
                    and shall establish procedures for administering the Bank.

       10.6.6       Requests for catastrophic leave shall be filed with the
                    Association.

       10.6.7       Requests for catastrophic leave do not absolve an employee
                    from providing all necessary documents verifying illness and
                    authorizing absence from the District due to illness.

       10.6.8       The Association shall inform the Human Resources Office of
                    the names of unit members who have donated sick leave
                    days and how many days they have donated.

       10.6.9       The Association shall provide the District, upon written
                    request, information and documentation regarding eligibility
                    for catastrophic leave and related matters.

       10.6.10      A unit member may file a grievance alleging a violation of
                    sections 10.6.2, 10.6.3, and 10.6.4 only.

  10.6.11         Catastrophic Leave shall be reopened at the request of either
                                      party.
                                   ARTICLE XI

                 11.0 TRANSFER/REASSIGNMENT PROVISIONS

11.1   Definitions of Terms

       11.1.1       Transfer: Transfer is the change of a unit member from one
                    site to another.

       11.1.2       Reassignment: A reassignment is a change of a unit
                    member's grade level assignment, a change between one
                    year and the next, or a change from one class to another
                    during the year, at grade level, in classroom
                    designation/program from English-only to Transitional or
                    Immersion, from Immersion to English-only or Transitional, or
                    from Transitional to English-only or Immersion, a cycle
                    change, a change of three or more preparations, or a change
                    to a combination class (two or more grade levels). A change
                    from a combination class to either grade or that combination
                    is not a reassignment. Reassignments shall be made at the
                    discretion of the site administration, subject to the provisions
                    of 11.4 and 11.5 below.



                                        69                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
       11.1.3      Transfer or Reassignment: A transfer or a reassignment may
                   be unit member-initiated or District-initiated.

       11.1.4      Opening: An opening is a position at a site without an
                   assigned unit member.

       11.1.5      Vacancy: A vacancy is a position at a given District site
                   which is not filled by a reassignment at the site, by a returnee
                   from a paid leave of absence, or by a District-initiated
                   transfer.

                   11.1.5.1      The determination of whether or not a vacancy
                                 or opening exists is within the sole discretion of
                                 the District.

11.2   Extra Preparation Time

       11.2.1      Unit members transferred, reassigned, or moved after the
                   first day of instruction shall be provided with one day working
                   with the person currently in the assignment or to prepare for
                   the assignment. An additional day(s) may be granted upon
                   request by the Associate Superintendent, Human Resource
                   or designee.



11.3   Effect of a Unit Member Transfer or Reassignment Request

       11.3.1      A unit member who has applied for a transfer or
                   reassignment to a specific vacancy or opening shall not, as a
                   result of having filed for a transfer or reassignment, be
                   removed from his/her current assignment until the transfer or
                   reassignment has been decided.

11.4   Notification of Reasons

       11.4.1      When a request for unit member-initiated reassignment or
                   transfer is denied for reasons other than lack of a vacancy,
                   District management shall, upon request, provide
                   unsuccessful applicants with a statement of reasons for
                   denial of their request for reassignment or transfer based on
                   the criteria listed in this Article.

11.5   Support Staff Personnel




                                       70                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
       11.5.1      The initial assignments of support staff personnel
                   (Psychologists, Speech/Language Specialists, Nurses,
                   Adapted P.E. Teachers, Migrant Education Teachers,
                   Curriculum Specialists, Itinerant Teachers, Child Welfare and
                   Attendance Workers) to work sites shall be at the discretion
                   of their respective departments. Changes in assignments
                   shall be made after seeking volunteers as appropriate and
                   shall not be made arbitrarily or capriciously.

11.6   Reassignment

       Unit Member-Initiated

       11.6.1      As openings occur at each site, they shall be made known to
                   all unit members of the site. Unit members off cycle, on
                   summer recess or on leave of absence shall provide
                   stamped, self-addressed envelopes if they want to be notified
                   of openings. The opening notice shall include the position,
                   level or subject matter of assignment, special credential if
                   applicable, or other pertinent needs or requirements, and the
                   closing date of such position which shall be a minimum of five
                   (5) duty days after the initial posting date of the opening.

       11.6.2      Unit members may request a reassignment to any specific
                   opening for which they are qualified during the time of the
                   opening.

       11.6.3      Selection of Candidate—District management shall select the
                   most qualified applicant for the opening based upon the
                   following criteria:

                   11.6.3.1 Posted qualifications for the opening, including
                            grade level and/or subject area, appropriate
                            credentials,     experience,    and any  special
                            qualifications for the opening.

                   11.6.3.2 Posted educationally-related needs of the District
                            and/or affected schools for grade level and/or
                            subject area.

                   11.6.3.3 Legal requirement for grade level and/or subject.

                   11.6.3.4 Years of experience in the District.




                                       71                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                          11.6.3.4.1 Interviews shall be reserved for instances
                                     when candidates are similar with regard to
                                     these criteria.
                          11.6.3.4.2 If two (2) or more applicants are equally
                                     qualified, seniority in the District shall be
                                     the determining factor.

       11.6.4      At any time prior to the granting of a reassignment, the
                   reassignment request may be withdrawn by the unit member.

       District-Initiated Reassignment

       11.6.5      Prior to making a District-initiated assignment caused by
                   declining enrollment, enrollment shifts, or budgetary
                   considerations, the District shall seek qualified volunteers at
                   the site including an attempt to notify those off cycle and
                   those on leave of absence. In the event District-initiated
                   reassignments must be made, they shall not be made
                   arbitrarily or capriciously.

       11.6.6      Unit members who voluntarily accept a change in job
                   assignment in lieu of layoff shall remain at the site at which
                   they are working at the time of the layoff/change of job
                   assignment if an opening exists at that time for which the unit
                   member is qualified.
       11.6.7      All other factors from 11.6.3 being equal, the unit member
                   who has the least seniority within the grade level or
                   department or site from which a reassignment must take
                   place shall be reassigned first.

11.7   Transfer

       Unit Member-Initiated Transfer

       11.7.1      Posting of Vacancies

                   11.7.1.1       As vacancies become known, they shall be
                                  posted at each open school site, Human
                                  Resources, and sent to the Association office.
                                  The vacancy notice shall include the position,
                                  location (if known), level or subject matter of
                                  assignment, credential and other requirements,
                                  and the closing date of the posting period,
                                  which shall be a minimum of five (5) duty days
                                  after the initial posting date of the vacancy
                                  notice.



                                         72                   SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
11.7.2   Requesting a Transfer—Unit members may request a
         transfer under the following procedures:

         11.7.2.1     Unit members may apply for transfer to any
                      specific vacancy for which they are qualified
                      during the time the vacancy is posted.

         11.7.2.2     Unit member-initiated transfers shall be
                      reviewed and a decision made prior to filling
                      vacancies.

         11.7.2.3     If a vacancy occurs during the school year
                      after the first semester or second trimester,
                      and a unit member is selected to transfer to
                      the assignment, such transfer may occur
                      during the school year if both principals and
                      the transferee agree. If both principals do not
                      agree, the selected unit member shall transfer
                      at the end of the school year.

         11.7.2.4     Between April 1 and May 15 of each year, unit
                      members may file a request to transfer to any
                      number of sites within the District, in which
                      case the District then shall consider the unit
                      member to be an applicant for vacancies
                      occurring at the sites listed on the transfer
                      request form. Such requests shall expire on
                      September 15.

         11.7.2.5     Permanent unit members requesting to
                      transfer shall be considered, if qualified, prior
                      to considering new hires.

11.7.3   District management shall select the most qualified unit
         member or applicant who has applied for the vacancy based
         upon the following criteria:

         11.7.3.1     Posted qualifications for the vacancy including
                      experience, appropriate credentials, and any
                      special qualifications for the vacant position

         11.7.3.2     Posted educationally-related needs of the
                      District and/or affected schools for grade level
                      and/or subject area




                           73                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
             11.7.3.3          Legal requirements for grade level and/or
                               subject area

              11.7.3.4         Review of evaluations and/or personnel files

              11.7.3.5         Years of experience in the District

                     11.7.3.5.1       If two (2) or more applicants are equally
                                      qualified, seniority in the District shall be
                                      the determining factor.

11.7.4       Other provisions relating to unit member-initiated transfer:

              11.7.4.1         Transfer requests shall be filed at Personnel
                               Services.

              11.7.4.2         At any time prior to the granting of a transfer,
                               the transfer requests may be withdrawn by the
                               unit member.

11.7.5       Unit members moving from a year-round calendar to a
             traditional calendar shall have their pay periods adjusted to
             reflect the work year at the beginning of the second school
             year in the new assignment.

11.7.6       If a year-round school unit member is off cycle or on summer
             recess and temporarily fills a vacancy while off cycle, he/she
             shall be paid their regular per diem rate of pay if they begin
             when the class begins for another cycle or traditional school
             year.

11.7.7       Unit members on other than traditional calendar shall be on a
             twelve (12) month pay schedule.

11.7.8       No permanent teacher shall be denied a request for a
             transfer or reassignment solely because he/she holds a hard-
             to-fill credential.

11.7.9       Unit members hired by the District after serving, as
             substitutes for a vacancy/opening shall have their status and
             salary adjusted retroactively to date of hire, contingent on
             credential status.

District-Initiated Transfers




                                    74                       SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
       11.7.10     District-initiated transfer caused by declining enrollment,
                   enrollment shifts, or budgetary considerations shall be
                   determined as follows:

                   11.7.10.1       Prior to initiating a District-initiated transfer, the
                   District shall seek appropriate volunteers from within the site
                   or department.

                   11.7.10.2      All other factors from 11.7.3 being equal, the
                   unit member who has the least seniority within the
                   department or site from which a transfer must take place
                   shall be transferred first.

                   11.7.10.3     Unit members subject to transfer under this
                   section shall receive priority over unit member-initiated
                   transfer for existing vacant positions for which they are
                   qualified.

                   11.7.10.4      Unit members shall not be subject to a District-
                   initiated transfer more than once during a school year.
                   (NOTE: Applies to transfers for declining enrollment,
                   enrollment shifts, or budgetary considerations.)

       11.7.11     District-initiated transfers caused by curricular modifications
                   and/or other educationally-related needs of the District and/or
                   affected schools may be recommended at any time. Such
                   transfers shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and in making
                   such transfers the District shall refer to the criteria in 11.7.3.

       11.7.12     A District-initiated transfer shall not result in loss of annual
                   contract salary or any health and welfare benefits negotiated
                   in this Agreement.

       11.7.13     Unit members transferred under 11.7.10 above shall be given
                   priority consideration over other unit member-initiated
                   transfers to be returned to the original school site when a
                   vacancy is available for which they are qualified and for which
                   they apply.

11.8   General Provisions

       11.8.1      No emergency-credentialed persons shall be hired by the
                   District until all credentialed unit members have had an
                   opportunity to apply for a vacancy.




                                         75                       SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
   11.8.2 All transfers and reassignments shall occur in accordance with the
                             provisions of this Article.
                                   ARTICLE XII

                          12.0 SAFETY CONDITIONS

12.1   Safety Committee: Within twenty (20) duty days following the opening of
       school, a Standing Safety Committee shall be organized at each site, and
       a joint Safety Committee shall be organized at the District. There shall be
       an even number of members up to 10 on the site level, half of whom shall
       be unit members elected by the unit members at that site and the balance
       shall be by classified employees at the site. The building administrator
       and/or his/her designee(s) may be member(s) of the site committee but
       shall not be counted in the aforesaid number of the committee. There
       shall be 12 members appointed to the District Safety Committee. SAEA
       shall appoint four (4) unit member representatives and administrative
       representatives and the classified employee organization shall appoint
       four (4) unit member representatives to the District Joint Safety
       Committee. The Associate Superintendent of Human Resources or
       designee shall appoint administrative representatives.

       12.1.1      The site administrator shall call the initial meeting to select a
                   chairperson. The chairperson shall call additional meetings
                   as necessary when safety issues are presented to him/her for
                   investigation and/or recommendation. The Joint District
                   Safety Committee shall meet on an as-needed basis, but no
                   less than two (2) times per year. Additionally, there shall be
                   at least four (4) meetings per year between certificated
                   representatives and administrative representatives to discuss
                   safety issues pertaining to certificated personnel. The
                   Associate Superintendent, Human Resources or designee
                   shall call these meetings.

12.2   Safe Workplace: The District shall make a good faith effort to provide a
       place of employment which is as safe as the nature of the employment
       and duties reasonably permit. Unit members shall comply with District
       rules and regulations to protect safety and health.

       12.2.1      In those classrooms/laboratories that have a specific number
                   of workstations, student safety shall determine the actual
                   number of students enrolled in a class or classes.

       12.2.2      Once a unit member reports an unsafe, unhealthy, and/or
                   unsanitary condition to her/his immediate supervisor, the
                   District shall begin investigation within five (5) days. If the
                   District finds an unsafe, unhealthy, and/or unsanitary



                                       76                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                   condition, the District shall begin to take steps to correct the
                   conditions within ten (10) duty days.

                   12.2.2.1       Corrections shall be in accordance with
                                  guidelines by the Association and the District.

       12.2.3      All unit members impacted by an unsafe, unhealthy, and/or
                   unsanitary condition shall be provided written notification as
                   to the resolution of the problem by the appropriate District
                   and/or site administrator.

       12.2.4      Each site shall keep a log of all safety concerns reported at
                   the site. Resolutions to problems with dates and outcomes as
                   well as outstanding issues shall be noted along with the
                   safety concern. This log shall be provided to the District office
                   annually. The District shall provide a copy of all safety logs to
                   SAEA within ten (10) duty days of receiving the logs from
                   each site. Unit members may request to look at the site logs
                   during any non-instructional, non-assigned duty time.

12.3   Infectious and Contagious Diseases: Upon a request from a unit
       member, the school nurse or site administrator shall investigate reports of
       pupils who suffer from contagious or infectious diseases.          If, upon
       investigation, the pupil is found to suffer from a disease which would
       constitute a threat to the safety of a unit member, then the District shall
       take such action as necessary to remedy the problem. If the site
       administrator takes any action, the school nurse shall be notified. Upon
       consultation with the school nurse, the site administrator shall notify
       appropriate unit members, including those directly involved with the pupil.

       12.3.1      If, upon arrival, a pupil's records indicate that the student is
                   suffering from a contagious or infectious disease, the site
                   administrator shall inform and consult with the school nurse
                   and notify appropriate unit members, including those directly
                   involved with the pupil.

       12.3.2      School nurses and SDC teachers (including but not limited to:
                   infant, preschool, SH, OH, SED, and adult transition) shall be
                   given the option of receiving the Hepatitis B vaccine at
                   District expense as a prevention of Hepatitis B through
                   reasonably anticipated blood- borne exposure. If other unit
                   members reasonably believe that their required job duties
                   include potential for occupational exposure, they shall be
                   given the option of receiving Hepatitis B at District expense.




                                       77                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
       12.3.3      Unit members shall not be expected to perform specialized
                   physical health care services as part of their daily
                   responsibilities. The District expects specialized health care
                   services to be performed by designated classified staff and
                   nurses as necessary. Specialized health care includes, but is
                   not limited to: diapering, dispensation of medications,
                   catheterizations, Credé, injections, illiostomies, colostomies,
                   gastrostomies,      tracheostomies,        suctions,    oxygen
                   administration, gavage, feeding, and draining.

       12.3.4      The District shall offer training annually on Universal
                   Precautions.

       12.3.5      Parent/student private required by law (i.e., HIV) shall prevail
                   regarding the above matters.

12.4   Pupil Discipline: A unit member may request in writing that a conference
       be held concerning any student who, in the opinion of the unit member,
       presents a potential, actual, or immediate danger to the safety of the unit
       member.      The site administrator shall promptly schedule such a
       conference with the unit member and, if practicable, shall include other
       appropriate personnel and the student's parent or guardian. The site
       administrator shall consider recommendations resulting from the
       conference and shall implement any actions necessary to protect the
       safety of the unit member. With respect to students who present a
       potential, actual, or immediate danger to the safety of a unit member, the
       following shall apply:

       12.4.1      It is recognized, understood, and agreed that the District and
                   teachers share a joint responsibility for encouraging and
                   supporting the resolution of pupil discipline problems.

                   12.4.1.1       The District from time to time will publish
                                  information concerning student discipline and
                                  make it available to teachers.

                   12.4.1.2       Unit members at each site involved in
                                  instruction of a pupil who has been suspended
                                  shall be informed of the beginning and ending
                                  dates of suspension.

                   12.4.1.3       All procedures outlined in Education Code
                                  48900 et seq. shall be followed.




                                       78                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
       12.4.2       A teacher may suspend any pupil from the teacher's class,
                    per Education Code 48910 and/or Board Policy 5119, for the
                    day of the suspension and the day following.

                    12.4.2.1       The teacher shall immediately report the
                    suspension to the principal or designee and send the pupil to
                    the principal or designee for appropriate action.

                    12.4.2.2     As soon as possible the teacher shall ask the
                    parent or guardian of the pupil to attend a parent-teacher
                    conference regarding the suspension.

                    12.4.2.3      The pupil shall not be returned to the class
                    from which he/she was suspended during the period of the
                    suspension without the concurrence of the teacher of the
                    class and the principal.

                    12.4.2.4      A pupil suspended from a class shall not be
                    placed in another regular class during the period of
                    suspension. However, if the pupil is assigned to more than
                    one class per day, this provision shall apply only to other
                    regular classes scheduled at the same time as the class from
                    which the pupil was suspended.

                    12.4.2.5        The District shall make available in all schools
                    a District form to be used by a teacher in the event the
                    teacher suspends a pupil from his/her class in accordance
                    with this provision.

12.5   Pertinent Student Information: The site administrator, if he/she has
       knowledge, shall as soon as reasonably possible provide all unit members
       having direct supervision responsibilities pertinent information concerning
       any student who exhibited a potential, actual or immediate danger to unit
       member(s). District personnel possessing such information shall provide
       it to the site administrator. This information, if available, shall be provided
       prior to the time the student is placed in the classroom(s). All appropriate
       staff shall be notified of seriously disruptive students as required and
       authorized by law. Any verified incident involving any student at a site that
       is deemed "threatening" as defined by law shall be reported to all
       appropriate staff as soon as reasonable possible.

12.6   Assaults/Threats: If a unit member is assaulted or threatened while in the
       performance of duties pursuant to his/her job description and/or other
       assigned duties, the unit member shall immediately inform the
       administrator and both shall report such assault or threat to the SAUSD
       School Police or Santa Ana Police Department or both.



                                         79                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
12.7   Breaks: No unit member shall be required to be supervising students
       more than 2½ hours consecutively without being provided a break of a
       minimum of 7½ minutes. For purposes of this section, passing time
       and/or nutrition breaks at the secondary level shall constitute sufficient
       time to satisfy the requirement set forth herein.

12.8   Personal Property Reimbursement

       12.8.1      Unit members who bring personal property to the work site to
                   be used as an integral part of and necessary to the edu-
                   cational program shall be reimbursed for any verified loss,
                   damage or destruction by malicious acts of others including
                   arson, burglary, or vandalism. "Verified Loss" shall be defined
                   for purposes of this article as any personal property with a
                   monetary value of $25.00 or more that is unusable for the
                   educational program or purpose the unit member provided it
                   for. Reimbursement is subject to the following conditions
                   strictly construed:

                   12.8.1.1      Written approval for the use of the personal
                                 property in the schools was given by the site
                                 administrator before the property was brought
                                 on District premises or before used while
                                 performing services for the District. Exceptions
                                 to such prior approval shall be eyeglasses,
                                 hearing aids, dentures, watches, or articles of
                                 clothing necessarily worn or carried by the
                                 employee. The value of the property shall be
                                 stated on the request form.                 The
                                 reimbursement value shall be determined as of
                                 the time of the verified loss and shall include
                                 normal allowance for depreciation.

                   12.8.1.2      Reasonable care shall be taken by the unit
                                 member to adequately protect such property
                                 while it is on school property. Reimbursement
                                 shall be conditioned upon the absence of
                                 negligence by the unit member.

                   12.8.1.3      The form to list private property shall be
                                 available at each site's office.

                   12.8.1.4      Only personal property in excess of $25.00
                                 shall be considered for reimbursement.




                                       80                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                  12.8.1.4        The maximum reimbursement for any one
                                  incident shall be $1,000.00. Requests for
                                  reimbursements of amounts over $1,000.00
                                  shall be submitted to the Superintendent, who
                                  shall consider the request and render a
                                  decision.

                  12.8.1.5        Under no circumstances shall these sections
                                  be interpreted to apply to a unit member's
                                  vehicle.

                  12.8.1.6        An Unusual Occurrence Report shall be filed
                                  with the site administrator by the unit member
                                  within five (5) calendar days of the incident.

                  12.8.1.7        The Risk Management Office shall conduct
                                  such investigation as may be necessary. The
                                  burden of proof in all cases is with the unit
                                  member seeking reimbursement.

12.9   Modified Day/Hot Weather

       12.9.1     The District and the Association shall apply for a waiver of
                  the instructional minutes requirement of Education Code
                  Section 46201 if it becomes necessary to declare more than
                  two (2) modified days in any school year under the
                  circumstances stated below:

                  12.9.1.1        If the temperature reaches 95 degrees and it is
                                  predicted by the U.S. National Weather
                                  Service that the temperature will continue at 95
                                  degrees or higher, the Superintendent shall
                                  declare a modified day or days for students in
                                  all non-air-conditioned facilities, or facilities
                                  where the air-conditioning has been non-
                                  functional for one consecutive 24-hour period
                                  after appropriate parent notices have been
                                  sent home.

                  12.9.1.2        When a modified day(s) is declared pursuant
                                  to 12.9.1 above, the starting time for afternoon
                                  kindergarten shall be adjusted to permit a
                                  uniform release time in those schools where
                                  facilities permit.

12.10 Pest Eradication



                                       81                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
         12.10.1    The District shall make reasonable efforts to keep all school
                    grounds and facilities free of unwanted rodents, pests, and
                    insects such as ants, roaches, and fleas. Insecticides/poisons
                    utilized on District property shall only occur in strict
                    compliance with applicable laws.

12.11 Secondary Traveling Teachers

         12.11.1    Site administrators at sites with traveling teachers shall
                    consult with teachers involved and develop a plan for
                    assigning traveling teachers on a fair and equitable basis.

12.11.2       On-site teachers shall not be given a traveling teacher assignment
if a physician verifies in writing that a reasonable accommodation under the
Americans with Disabilities Act is recommended or that the teacher's health
would be detrimentally affected. In either case, the physician shall provide the
projected period of time that such assignment shall not be given.

                                    ARTICLE XIII

        13.0 PROVISIONS RESERVED TO THE GOVERNING BOARD

It is not the intention of the parties, in setting forth the provisions reserved to the
Governing Board, to detract or diminish in any way the rights of the Association
or of unit members as expressly set forth elsewhere in this Agreement.

13.1     All matters not specifically enumerated as within the scope of nego-
         tiations or the consulting rights of the Association in Government Code
         3543.2 are reserved to the District. It is agreed that such reserved
         rights include, but are not limited to, the exclusive right and power to
         determine, implement, supplement, change, modify or discontinue, in
         whole or in part, temporarily or permanently, any of the following:

         13.1.1     The legal, operational, geographical, and organizational
                    structure of the District, including the chain of command,
                    division of authority, organizational divisions and
                    subdivisions, external and internal boundaries of all kinds,
                    and advisory commissions and committees;

         13.1.2     The financial structure of the District, including all sources
                    and amounts of financial support, income, funding, taxes and
                    debt, and all means and conditions necessary or incidental to
                    the securing of same, including compliance with any
                    qualifications or requirements imposed by law or by funding
                    sources as a condition of receiving funds; all investment



                                          82                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
         policies and practices; all budgetary matters and procedures,
         including the budget calendar, the budget formation process,
         accounting methods, fiscal and budget control and policies
         and procedures, and all budgetary allocations, reserves, and
         expenditures apart from those expressly allocated to fund the
         wage and benefit obligations of this Agreement;

13.1.3   The acquisition, disposition, number, location, types and utili-
         zation of all District properties, whether owned, leased, or
         otherwise controlled, including all facilities, grounds, parking
         areas and other improvements, the personnel, work, service
         and activity functions assigned to such properties;

13.1.4   All services to be rendered to the public and to District
         personnel in support of the services rendered to the public;
         the nature, methods, quality, quantity, frequency and
         standards of service, and the personnel, facilities, vendors,
         supplies, materials, vehicles, equipment and tools to be used
         in connection with such services, the subcontracting of
         services to be rendered and functions to be performed,
         including educational services unable to be performed by unit
         members, support, construction, maintenance and repair
         services;

13.1.5   The utilization of personnel not covered by this Agreement,
         including but not limited to substitutes, casual, consultants,
         supervisory or managerial personnel, to do work which is
         normally done but unable to be performed by unit members
         covered hereby, and the methods of selection and
         assignment of such personnel;

13.1.6   The educational policies, procedures, objectives, goals and
         programs, including those relating to curriculum, course
         content, textbook selection, educational equipment and
         supplies, admissions, attendance, student transfers, grade
         level advancement, guidance, grading, testing, records,
         health, conduct, discipline, transportation, food services,
         racial and ethnic balance, establishing of extra-curricular and
         co-curricular activities and emergency situations, and the
         substantive and procedural rights and obligations of students,
         parents, teachers, other personnel and the public with
         respect to such matters, subject only to such consultation
         rights of the Association;

13.1.7   The selection, direction, promotion, discipline of all personnel
         of the District; affirmative action and equal employment



                             83                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                  policies and programs to improve the District's utilization of
                  women and minorities; the assignment of unit members to
                  classrooms, and the determination as to whether, when and
                  where there is a job opening;

       13.1.8     The job classifications and the content and qualifications
                  thereof;

       13.1.9     The dates, times and hours of operations of District facilities,
                  functions, and activities;

       13.1.10    Safety and security measures for students, the public, prop-
                  erties, facilities, vehicles, materials, supplies, and equipment;

       13.1.11    The rules, regulations and policies for all unit members,
                  students and the public, subject only to limitations contained
                  in this Agreement.

13.2   In addition to its statutory reserve rights, the District also retains within
       its sole discretion all rights and powers not expressly limited by the clear
       and explicit language of this Agreement, including but not limited to the
       exclusive right and power to determine, implement, supplement,
       change, modify or discontinue, in whole or in part, temporarily or
       permanently, any of the following:

       13.2.1     Staffing patterns.

       13.2.2     The administration of all employee health and benefit plans,
                  including the selection of all carriers of health and benefit
                  plans, and the manner and methods of funding such plans.

13.3   The exercise of any right reserved to the District herein in a particular
       manner or the non-exercise of any such right shall not be deemed a
       waiver of the District's right or preclude the District from exercising the
       right in a different manner.

13.4   Any dispute arising out of or in any way connected with either the
       existence of or the exercise of any of the above-described provisions, or
       any other rights of the District not limited by this Agreement, is not
       subject to the grievance provisions set forth in Article VI, but may be
       subject to the Recommendation/Concern procedure as described in the
       Information section.


                                 ARTICLE XIV




                                       84                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                              14.0 DISCIPLINE

14.1   Just Cause Discipline: The District retains the sole right to discipline
       unit members for just cause, applying principles of due process.

14.2   Notice: In order to be timely filed, a charge shall be initiated no later
       than twenty-five (25) duty days following the act or occurrence upon
       which the charges are based or twenty-five (25) days following the date
       the District reasonably should have known of the act or occurrence.

14.3   Prior Events: In imposing discipline, the District shall not take into
       account any prior charges which occurred more than four (4) years
       preceding the date of the charge or charges giving rise to the discipline.

14.4   Progressive Discipline: The corrective process of applying penalties
       short of discharge where conduct is of a less serious nature and the
       employee has not repeatedly engaged in such conduct. The nature of
       such discipline should be appropriate to the conduct and need not begin
       with the least serious disciplinary action. The basic steps in progressive
       discipline are listed below:

       14.4.1     Verbal reprimand(s)

       14.4.2     Conference with written memorandum of summary

       14.4.3     Written reprimand (in personnel file)

       14.4.4     Suspension(s) with or without pay of up to 15 days

       It is understood that some occurrences leading to discipline under this
       provision may be of such seriousness as to not require strict adherence
       to each of the steps set forth above.

14.5   If a supervisor recommends disciplinary action, the unit member has the
       right to appeal the recommended action to the Superintendent through
       the Associate Superintendent, Human Resources by filing a written
       request within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of such a
       recommendation. The supervisor or his/her designee may grant an
       additional five (5) days to file the request to appeal. Failure to file such
       a written appeal within the stated time shall waive the right of appeal.

14.6   Grievability: Sections 14.4.1 to 14.4.3 shall be grievable only to the
       extent that the steps set forth were appropriately adhered to. The
       substance of statements made under 14.4.1 to 14.4.3 shall not be
       grievable.




                                       85                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
    14.7 For purposes of this Article, discipline shall not be defined to include
termination, suspension pursuant to Education Code Sections 44939 and 44940,
   or non-re-election pursuant to California Education Code Section 44882, nor
  does this Article in any way limit the District's right to initiate such procedures.
                                    ARTICLE XV

                           15.0 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS

15.1     Establish a 125 plan (Flexible Spending Account) for premiums, out-of-
         pocket medical costs, and child care expenses. This plan will include a
         charge to employees for dependent care or unreimbursed medical
         expenses of $4 per month for one option and $6 per month for both
         options (no charge for premium).

15.2     Establish a procedure whereby employees can elect not to be covered
         by one or more benefit programs.

15.3     Deduct $5 tenthly from each employee electing medical benefit
         coverage. This payment will be waived for retirees enrolled in the
         Kaiser Senior Advantage/Health Net Seniority Plus plans.

15.4     Deduct $40 tenthly from each employee electing medical benefit
         coverage for spouse or spouse and eligible dependents. This payment
         will be waived for retirees enrolled in the Kaiser Senior
         Advantage/Health Net Seniority Plus plans.          In cases where an
         employee and spouse are both employees of the District, each shall
         have the deduction of $5 tenthly in order to receive medical benefits;
         however, only one shall have to elect the $40 spousal deduction for
         their benefits to be fully coordinated under the Group Health Plan.

15.5     Deduct $10 tenthly from each employee electing medical benefit
         coverage for eligible dependents other than spouse.

15.6     For the Group Health Plan, the deductible is $200 per covered person,
         with a $400 family maximum.

15.7     For the Group Health Plan, for employees hired after the effective date
         of the Agreement, deny coverage for pre-existing conditions until the
         first of the month following the completion of one year of employment.
         HIPA certification will waive the pre-existing condition(s).

15.8     For the Group Health Plan, the coinsurance maximum is $7,500.

15.9     Establish that eligibility for all dependent coverage on all plans for 19-24
         year olds be as follows:




                                         86                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
15.9.1   Any unmarried child under age nineteen (19) years (including
         a legally-adopted child, stepchild and foster child if actually
         living with employee in a regular parent-child relationship) but
         only if primarily dependent upon employee for support and
         while employee may claim such dependent as an exemption
         for Federal Income Tax purposes; or a never-married student
         age 19 through age 24 who is related to the employee as a
         natural or legally adopted child, a stepchild, or a child under
         legal guardianship.     Such child must also be primarily
         dependent on the employee for financial support, and must
         be claimed by the employee as a dependent for Federal
         Income Tax purposes. The student must be able to provide
         proof acceptable to the District that he/she is in full-time
         attendance at one or a combination of qualified educational
         institutions.

         15.9.1.1      As used herein, "full-time" attendance requires
                       either a statement from a qualified educational
                       institution that the student is accepted for the
                       semester as "full-time" and/or at least 12
                       semester units as determined by college or
                       university standards.

         15.9.1.2      A "qualified educational institution" includes
                       high schools, junior colleges, or other two-year
                       colleges, or universities or colleges granting
                       four-year degrees or post-graduate degrees;
                       proprietary schools such as business colleges,
                       professional schools, trade and technical
                       schools which are established as other than
                       evening schools exclusively.

         15.9.1.3      Cessation of full-time school attendance will
                       terminate dependent status with respect to the
                       student EXCEPT that: (a) if cessation is due to
                       school vacation, dependent status will
                       terminate on the date the school reconvenes if
                       attendance does not resume, or (b) if
                       cessation is due to graduation, dependent
                       status will terminate at the end of the third
                       calendar month following graduation.

         15.9.1.4      An eligible dependent does not include any
                       dependent who is on active duty in a military
                       service.




                             87                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
15.9.2   A handicapped child's dependent status shall not terminate
         solely by reason of his/her having attained age 19, if such
         child is related to the employee as a natural or legally
         adopted child, a stepchild, or a child under legal
         guardianship, and if:

         a.      On the day immediately prior to the attained of age
                 19, the child was a covered dependent under the
                 plan, and

         b.      The child was handicapped on the day prior to the
                 attainment of such age, and

         c.      The child is fully dependent upon the employee for
                 support and maintenance.

         15.9.2.1       Within 31 days after the child turns 19, proof of
                        the child's incapacity must be submitted to the
                        Contract Administrator. Thereafter, continued
                        proof of the disability may be required once per
                        year.

         15.9.2.2       For these purposes, "handicapped" is defined
                        as disabled and thus incapable of self-
                        sustaining employment by reason of mental
                        retardation or physical handicap. The District,
                        at its expense, might require an independent
                        medical or psychological verification.

15.9.3   A Dependent Status Review Committee shall be established
         consisting of two members of the Association and two
         representatives of the District. This committee shall review
         concerns and appeals in the matter of dependent eligibility
         and make recommendations to the District.

15.9.4   A newborn child of the employee or employee's spouse.
         Such newborn children automatically have coverage for the
         first thirty-one (31) days of life. Coverage after thirty-one (31)
         days is contingent upon the employee enrolling the newborn
         as a family dependent, and paying any premium or charges
         due and owing from the date of birth, within thirty-one (31)
         days following the birth.

15.9.5   The following are not considered family dependents:

         (1)     Foster Child, unless meeting requirements of 15.9.1



                              88                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                   (2)    Grandchild unless meeting requirements of 15.9.1
                   (3)    Any other person who does not meet the
                          requirements of at least one of the categories in
                          section 15.9.1 and 15.9.2 above.

        15.9.6    The following are considered family dependents:

                   (1)    State Registered Domestic Partners

15.10   For Health Net/Kaiser add a $5 co-pay for office visits and a $5 or $4
        co-pay, respectively, for prescriptions.

15.11   For Kaiser Medical, reduce eligibility for mental illness treatment to 20
        visits per member each calendar year. Co-payments are $20 per visit
        for individual therapy and $10 per visit for group therapy.

15.12   Express Scripts is the prescription administrator for prescriptions under
        the Group Health Plan and continue the $4 co-payment for generic and
        $8 co-payment for brand-name drugs.

15.13   The co-payment for crowns required under the PacifiCare dental plan is
        $50 with the provision that gold crowns are authorized if the employee
        pays for the extra cost of the gold.

15.14   PPO providers shall be reimbursed at 100% of eligible charges for
        hospital (inpatient) expenses and at 80% of eligible charges for
        doctor/health care provider (outpatient) expenses. Non-PPO providers
        will be reimbursed at 90% of eligible charges for hospital (inpatient)
        expenses and at 70% of eligible charges for doctor/health care provider
        (outpatient) expenses. Once the total of all eligible charges reaches
        $7,500, all subsequent eligible charges will be reimbursed at 100%.

        15.14.1   Should the Blue Cross of California provider plan be
                  dissolved or should any of the Orange County, Los Angeles,
                  or Riverside County hospitals drop from the plan at any time
                  during the life of this Agreement, the parties shall
                  immediately meet to renegotiate the provisions of this
                  Agreement.

15.15   When the choice of service providers is beyond the unit member’s
        control, non-PPO providers and hospitals shall be reimbursed at
        reasonable and customary rates.

15.16   All full-time home teachers (a full-time home teacher is one who
        teaches approximately 525 hours in a school year) shall receive the
        same benefits as any other unit member.



                                      89                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
15.17   Any permanent, probationary, and temporary unit members employed
        on a contract full time shall receive the same benefits as any unit
        member. Unit members voluntarily reducing contract to less than full
        time shall receive benefits only if they pay for the proportion of benefit
        costs equal to the proportion of the reduction of their contract. Unit
        members whose contracts are involuntarily reduced shall continue to
        receive full benefits.

        15.17.1   Family coverage for surviving covered family members in the
                  case of death of a unit member or retiree shall continue for a
                  period of six (6) months beginning with the first of the month
                  following the death of the unit member.

15.18   A unit member on leave shall have the option to continue any health
        and dental, vision and life insurance benefits negotiated in this
        Agreement at his/her own expense (see Article X, Section 10.4.12).

15.19   All costs for medical examination and tests required by the District shall
        be paid by the District.

15.20   The parties agree to a committee to review and study health benefits
        and retirement incentive programs.         Individual members may
        recommend modifications to their respective organizations.

15.21   Upon request, the Association shall be provided copies of master
        contracts with insurance carriers.

15.22   The Association shall be given the opportunity to proofread insurance
        brochures if the District is given such an opportunity.

15.23   During the term of this Agreement, the District shall make available
        benefit plans with provisions as are in the plans listed below:

        a.   SAUSD Open Enrollment publication
        b.   Summary Plan Description
        c.   Blue Cross/Kaiser Evidence of Coverage
        d.   Delta Dental Group #6637—Maximum annual limit will increase to
             $2,000.
        e.   PacifiCare Dental Health Plan "The Custom 300 Group Plan"
        f.   Met Life Dental
        g.   Vision Service Plan for Santa Ana Unified School District Group
             Health Plan
        h.   Blue Cross "Prescription Drug Program" (excludes HMO’s)
        i.   United Behavioral Health
        j.   Health Net Seniority Plus/Kaiser Senior Advantage medical plan



                                       90                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
        15.23.1     Group Health Care Plan - subject to revisions in this
                    Agreement

                    15.23.1.1    Medical as described in (a) and (b)
                    15.23.1.2    Prescriptions as described in (a) and (h)
                    15.23.1.3    Vision as described in (a) and (g)
                    15.23.1.4    Mental Health as described in (a), (c) and (i)
                    15.23.1.5    The lifetime maximum $1,200,000 effective
                                 January 1, 1997.

       15.23.2 Blue Cross HMO/Kaiser Medical as described in (a) and (c)

       15.23.3 Delta Dental as described in (a) and (d)

       15.23.4 Met Life Dental as described in (a) and (f)

       15.23.5 PacifiCare Dental Health Plan as described in (a) and (e)

       15.23.6 $40,000 term life insurance (effective 1/1/97)

       15.23.7 Blue Cross Seniority Plus/Kaiser Senior Advantage medical as
               described in (a) and (j)

15.24 The District shall pay the increased costs for health and welfare benefit
      programs for 2001-02 and 2002-03.

15.25 The Health Benefits Committee shall obtain bids for health and welfare
      benefits beginning with the 2003-04 school year from providers including
      a provider of SAEA's choice.


                                  ARTICLE XVI

                            16.0 SUMMER SCHOOL

16.1   All teachers shall be employed on an if and as needed hourly basis,
       subject to a contingency of sustained enrollment of students.

       16.1.1     The summer school/intersession duty day shall normally be 4½
                  hours, excluding non-duty breaks.

       16.1.2     If a scheduled summer school/intersession day is canceled and
                  State funds are forthcoming for that day, then teachers will be
                  paid for that day.




                                       91                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
16.2   Summer school personnel shall be limited to unit members currently
       employed in the District. Unit members submitting resignations to be
       effective at the end of a school year will be eligible for summer school
       employment for the summer immediately following the end of that school
       year. If fully credentialed unit members are not available from the unit,
       the District has the discretion to employ non-credentialed unit members
       and then teachers from outside the District.

       16.2.1   Traditional School Teacher Selection Procedure

                16.2.1.1     A listing of all tentative position openings for
                             summer school teachers will be adequately
                             publicized by the office of Human Resources by
                             posting such positions in all schools within ten (10)
                             duty days after the date of Board approval of a
                             summer school program.

                16.2.1.2     Unit member's applications will be submitted
                             within ten (10) duty days of the date of the posting
                             of the summer school positions; tentative selection
                             and notification of candidates shall occur within
                             fifteen (15) duty days of the close of applications,
                             but no later than five (5) calendar days before the
                             end of the school year.

                16.2.1.3     Priority consideration for summer school
                             assignments shall be given to unit members fully
                             credentialed/certified for the summer school
                             assignment.

                16.2.1.4     The following criteria shall be used for selection of
                             summer school/intersession teachers:

                      a.      Appropriate credential/certification

                      b.      Legal requirements

                      c.      Experience within the last five years teaching in
                              methods, techniques or programs as publicized in
                              the tentative position openings for a specific site

                      d.      Subject area experience

                      e.      Grade-level experience




                                      92                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
               f.     Educationally-related needs of the District and/or
                      schools as publicized in the tentative position
                      openings for a specific site

         Where two or more qualified unit members apply for the same
         position, seniority in the District shall govern.

         The District shall not be arbitrary, capricious, or unreasonable
         with respect to summer school intersession assignments.

                      16.2.1.4.1 For elementary traditional summer
                                 school, priority shall be given to unit
                                 members regularly assigned to the
                                 summer school site.

                      16.2.1.4.2 Elementary unit members regularly
                                 assigned to sites that do not offer
                                 summer school/intersession shall be
                                 placed in the eligibility pool at the
                                 school where summer school students
                                 from their home site are assigned.

         16.2.1.5     Prior summer school intersession assignments will
                      decrease priority selection after two (2)
                      consecutive years of summer school intersession
                      service.

         16.2.1.6     Teachers who accept assignments and then
                      choose not to work will be considered as if they
                      did work. Teachers who only teach one class or
                      one intersession (except by choice) will be
                      counted as one-half year worked.

         16.2.1.7     If a teacher applies for both regular summer
                      school and driver training in summer school,
                      he/she must choose one or the other. In the event
                      of a shortage of driver training teachers for
                      summer school, he/she may elect to do both.

         16.2.1.8     The extended year programs of ROP, Special
                      Schools, Phoenix House, Migrant Education,
                      Independent Study, and the summer school
                      and/or intersession program of Special Education
                      are not subject to this Article.

16.2.2   Year Round School Teacher Selection Procedure



                               93                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                16.2.2.1    A listing of all tentative intersession position
                            openings shall be posted at each site offering
                            intersessions. Such postings shall occur in May
                            for intersessions that take place in July or August
                            and in July for intersessions that take place in
                            September through June.

                16.2.2.2    If positions are not filled by this process, the
                            District shall distribute a list of vacancies to all
                            sites where teachers would be available to teach
                            intersession. Teachers interested shall apply
                            directly to the site offering intersession.

                16.2.2.3    The selection criteria shall be that cited in
                            16.2.1.3, 16.2.1.4, 16.2.1.5, and 16.2.1.6.

16.3   Sick Leave

       16.31    Unit members shall be credited with .8 sick day for working
                75% or more at four and one-half (4½) hours a day. Unit
                members who work more or less than four and one-half (4½)
                hours a day shall have sick leave prorated accordingly.

16.4   Observations of Summer School Teachers

       16.4.1   Observations may be conducted during the time a unit member
                is on duty or performing summer school responsibilities.

                16.4.1.1    The observation shall be related to those items
                            observed.

                            16.4.1.1.1    Such observations shall be recorded
                                          on the Summer School Observation
                                          Report form and shall be transmitted
                                          to the unit member within five (5)
                                          duty days.

                16.4.1.2    The evaluator shall schedule a conference relative
                            to the observation. Such request shall occur
                            within two (2) duty days of the receipt of the
                            written observation by the unit member and the
                            conference held within three (3) duty days of the
                            receipt of such request.




                                     94                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                16.4.1.3      Observations of summer school teachers shall be
                              filed separately from the teachers' personnel files
                              and not used as part of the unit member's regular
                              evaluation. Such observations will be maintained
                              in a separate file.

16.5   Summer school teachers shall be allowed to share their summer school
       contracts under the following conditions:

       16.5.1   A joint application shall be filed by the two teachers.

       16.5.2   Each of the two teachers works 50% of the contract by one
                working consecutive days for 50% of the session and the other
                finishing out the second 50% of the session.

       16.5.3   Any other potential arrangement for sharing a summer school
                contract shall be submitted to the Assistant Superintendent-
                Personnel Services, who shall consider the request and render
                a decision.

       16.5.4   Seniority shall apply as cited in section 16.2.1.4, but only one of
                the two unit members needs to conform to the conditions set
                forth in 16.2.1.4.

16.6   Class Size

       16.6.1   Good faith efforts shall be made to maintain class sizes, which
                recognize the needs and requests of students, as well as the
                interests of the teachers and the schools.

       16.6.2   Reasonable efforts shall be made to balance class sizes for
                summer school and intersession by the beginning of the
                second week of classes.

16.7   Retention/At Risk of Retention and Reading Difficulties Programs

       16.7.1   For the balance of the 1999-2000 school year, the following
                teacher selection process based upon the following priority
                order shall apply:

                a.    Fully credentialed unit members assigned to the site(s)
                      where students attend these programs.
                b.    Fully credentialed unit members assigned to other sites
                      where students attend these programs.




                                       95                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                c.    Secondary school unit members with appropriate
                      credentials and teaching experience at the levels
                      (elementary or intermediate) of the students attending
                      these programs.
                d.    Emergency credentialed teaches with District experience
                      at the levels (elementary or intermediate) where students
                      attend these programs.
                e.    Teachers outside the District with appropriate credentials
                      and teaching experience at the levels (elementary or
                      intermediate) where students attend these programs.
                f.    All others.

                16.7.1.1     The selection process shall emphasize selection
                             of teachers with recent training and/or recent
                             experience in the teaching of reading. At grade
                             levels fourth (4th) through eighth (8th) recent
                             experience in reading, language arts, and math
                             shall be emphasized.

                16.7.1.2     If two or more applicants have equal qualifications
                             within a 16.7.1 priority, seniority in the District shall
                             be the determining factor.

                16.7.1.3     Prior assignments in these programs will decrease
                             priority selection after two (2) consecutive years of
                             service in these programs.

       16.7.2   Teachers volunteering to teach in the programs shall be paid
                $25.00 per hour of instruction.

       16.7.3   Initial enrollment in these classes shall not exceed twenty-two
                (22) students. No additional students may be added to a class
                except to maintain a level of up to twenty (20) students per
                class.

       16.7.4   SAEA agrees to discuss continuance of the above selection
                process and compensation level for the 2000 summer school
                and intersession regarding these programs.


                                ARTICLE XVII

                           17.0 WORK STOPPAGE

17.1   The Association hereby agrees that it, its agents, representatives, unit
       members or persons acting in concert with any of them, shall not incite,



                                      96                        SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
       encourage, or participate in any strike, walkout, slowdown, or work
       stoppage against the District, including but not limited to disputes
       concerning matters covered by this Agreement, disputes with other labor
       organizations, persons or employers, or jurisdictional disputes. In the
       event of any such activities on the part of any unit members, the
       Association and its officers will take every necessary step to cause those
       unit members to end or avert the same.

17.2   Individual unit members engaging in, encouraging, sanctioning, or
       assisting any strike, slowdown, work stoppage, or other concerted
       interference against the District in violation of this Article, may be subject
       to the discipline provisions of this Agreement or the Education Code.

17.3   It is understood that in the event the Association, its officers or agents
       violate this Article, the District shall be entitled to withhold any rights,
       privileges or services provided for in this Agreement.

                                 ARTICLE XVIII

        18.0 CONCERNS/COMPLAINTS AGAINST UNIT MEMBERS

18.1   Initial presentation of concern: Any person other than a student wishing
       to present a concern/complaint is to present the concern/complaint within
       15 days after becoming aware of the circumstances creating the
       concern/complaint, first to the unit member who is the subject of the
       concern/complaint. (See 18.9 below for processing student
       concerns/complaints)

18.2   If the concern is not resolved after presentation to the unit member, or if
       the concerned person chooses not to present the concern to the unit
       member, the concern may be presented to the respective site
       administrator.

       18.2.1   The site administrator shall encourage the concerned person
                and the unit member to meet and discuss the concern. If such
                meeting is not held, the administrator shall proceed to
                investigate the concern with due respect to the confidentiality of
                the issues and parties involved.

       18.2.2   The findings of the investigation shall be communicated to the
                parties after which the administrator shall encourage a joint
                meeting of the administrator, unit member, and concerned
                person to discuss the concern and findings.

18.3   If the concerned person is not satisfied with the resolution of the concern,
       he/she shall be instructed of the procedure to file a written complaint with



                                        97                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
       the Superintendent. If such a written complaint is filed, a copy shall be
       forwarded to the unit member and the investigation of the complaint shall
       proceed as specified in Board Policies/Regulations.

       18.3.1   Upon request of the unit member, a conference shall be
                conducted in an effort to resolve the complaint.      If the
                complainant does not attend the conference, the complaint will
                be deemed withdrawn and not entered into the unit member's
                personnel file and the procedure under this article will be
                terminated.

       18.3.2   In the event that the conference has not resolved the complaint
                and the District determines that it may take disciplinary action
                short of termination against the unit member, such action shall
                be taken only in accordance with Article 14, Discipline.

18.4   Representation: Unit members are entitled upon request to
       representation during any meetings/conferences conducted under these
       provisions. Administrators shall make a good faith effort to remind unit
       members of their right to representation, but failure to do so shall not be
       considered prejudicial to the District.

18.5   Records of complaints: If an investigation by the District shows that the
       complaint has no merit, no reference or record of the complaint shall be
       included in the unit member's personnel file.

18.6   Anonymous complaints: Anonymous complaints shall not be processed
       pursuant to the provisions of this article.

18.7   Unit member response: Unit member shall be entitled to respond in
       writing to any complaints lodged under this procedure and to have such
       response attached to any written material relating to complaints
       hereunder.

18.8   Other procedures: The District retains the right to pursue other legal
       procedures where independent investigation proves that the complaint
       has merit.

18.9   Student concerns/complaints may be presented to the unit member or
       the administration. If the concern/complaint is presented to the unit
       member and remains unresolved, it may be presented to the
       administration.

       18.9.1   The site administrator shall encourage a meeting with the unit
                member and the students in an attempt to resolve the matter.




                                       98                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
       18.9.2   Prior to an administrative investigation, the unit member shall
                be informed of the concern/complaint unless the Santa Ana
                Police Department or other law enforcement recommends to
                the administrator that the unit member should not be informed.

       18.9.3   Any disciplinary action taken by the administrator shall follow
                Article 14 or the appropriate Education Code provisions.

       18.9.4   Student concerns/complaints shall not be subject to the
                grievance procedure except for violations of Article 14 and the
                procedures of this article (18.0).


                                 ARTICLE XIX

                           19.0 PERSONNEL FILE

19.1   All materials in the personnel file of unit members which may serve as a
       basis for affecting their employment status are to be made available for
       inspection by the unit member involved.

19.2   The materials referred to in the foregoing statement (19.1 above) are not
       to include ratings, reports or records which (a) were obtained prior to the
       employment of the person involved, (b) were prepared by identifiable
       examination committee members, or (c) were obtained in connection with
       a promotional examination.

19.3   Every unit member shall have the right to inspect such materials upon
       request, provided that the request to inspect such materials is made at a
       time when such person is not actually required to render service to the
       District.

19.4   Information of a derogatory nature shall not be entered or filed unless
       and until the unit member is given notice and an opportunity to review
       and comment thereon. A unit member shall have the right to enter, and
       have attached to any such derogatory statement, his/her own comments
       thereon, but such review shall take place during normal business hours,
       and the unit member shall be released from duty for this purpose without
       salary deduction.

       19.4.1   Information placed in the personnel file under Section 19.4 shall
                carry the date stamp of the office of Human Resources.

19.5   When commendatory materials are submitted to District office personnel,
       a copy shall be sent to affected unit member(s) within ten (10) working
       days.



                                       99                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                                  ARTICLE XX

                20.0 PEER ASSISTANCE AND REVIEW (PAR)*

20.1   The Santa Ana Educators' Association and the Santa Ana Unified School
       District are continuously striving to provide the highest possible quality of
       education. Therefore, the parties agree to cooperate in the design and
       implementation of programs to improve the quality of instruction through
       peer assistance and review. Teachers referred to, or who volunteer for,
       the program are viewed as professionals who deserve to have resources
       available provided to them in the interest of improving performance to a
       successful standard.

       20.1.1   Time Lines

                20.1.1.1      The parties agree to meet and modify the time
                              lines of this provision as necessary and mutually
                              agreed to.

                20.1.1.2      The Peer Assistance and Review Program shall
                              be implemented July 1, 2000.

                20.1.1.3      The PAR Program shall begin for a referred
                              participating teacher at the beginning of his/her
                              next school year (July for YRS, September for
                              traditional schools).

                20.1.1.4      In its inaugural year, the Peer Review Panel
                              (Panel) Members shall be appointed no later than
                              August 1, 2000. Thereafter, joint panel members
                              shall be appointed no later than October 1.

                20.1.1.5      All application materials for potential Consulting
                              Teachers shall be turned in to the District office on
                              or before December 1 for consideration for the
                              next school year.

                20.1.1.6      The Consulting Teacher shall issue to the Panel a
                              Final Report in the assistance and review year not
                              later than 35 duty days before the end of the
                              Referral Participating Teachers' instructional year.

                20.1.1.7      The Panel shall by majority vote select Consulting
                              Teachers no later than May 1.



                                       100                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
         20.1.1.8    The Panel shall send a list of consulting Teachers
                     to each Referred Participating Teacher by May 17.

         20.1.1.9    Evaluators shall refer Participating Teachers to the
                     Panel by May 15.

         20.1.1.10   The Referred Participating Teacher shall submit
                     his or her Consulting Teacher preferences by May
                     20.

         20.1.1.11   The Panel shall assign each Referred
                     Participating Teacher a Consulting Teacher by
                     May 25.

         20.1.1.12   The Panel shall review applications of voluntary
                     permanent       teachers    and    approve   their
                     participation in the PAR Program or refer them to
                     other appropriate District programs.

20.1.2   Peer Review Panel

         20.1.2.1    The Peer Review Panel shall consist of seven (7)
                     members, four (4) of whom shall be certificated
                     classroom teachers who are chosen to serve by
                     the Association. They shall possess equal or
                     greater qualifications than Consulting Teachers
                     and shall represent elementary (2), middle (1),
                     and high school (1) levels. The District shall
                     choose the three (3) administrators on the Panel.
                     Initially, two (2) classroom teacher Panel Members
                     shall serve three (3) years; the other two (2) for
                     two (2) years, and thereafter all terms are to be
                     two (2) years. In the event of an absence or a
                     resignation of a classroom teacher from the Panel,
                     the Association may immediately appoint an
                     alternate. Panel Members may not serve for more
                     than two (2) consecutive terms. Less than 75% of
                     a term served as a result of resignation or
                     absence shall not be part of two (2) consecutive
                     terms.

         20.1.2.2    The Panel shall establish its own meeting
                     schedule. To form a quorum, a majority of the
                     Panel Members present shall be SAEA-
                     appointed classroom teachers and there shall



                             101                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
           be at least one administrator. Such meetings
           shall take place outside the duty day. PAR
           Panel members shall receive $200 for each
           meeting attended. Members of the Panel shall
           be released from their regular duties to receive
           training subject to the approval of the
           Associate Superintendent, Human Resources
           or designee without loss of pay or benefits.
           The parties agree to evaluate this process and
           pay arrangement on an annual basis and make
           adjustments accordingly to meet the needs of
           the PAR Program and Panel members.

20.1.2.3   Panel members shall be reimbursed for
           reasonable and necessary mileage expenses
           directly related to the performance of Panel duties
           utilizing the established mileage rate of the
           District.

20.1.2.4   Panel members shall be reimbursed for
           reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in
           the performance of their duties directly related to
           the PAR Program.

20.1.2.5   The Peer Review Panel shall be responsible for
           the following:

           20.1.2.5.1    Participating in annual training for
                         Panel members

           20.1.2.5.2.   Establishing its own Rules of
                         Procedure for effectuating the
                         provisions of this Article. Said rules
                         and procedures shall be consistent
                         with    the    provisions    of    the
                         Agreement, and to the extent that
                         there is an inconsistency, the
                         Agreement and ultimately the law
                         shall prevail. Based upon legislative
                         modification or deletion of PAR, the
                         Association and the District agree to
                         renegotiate the PAR Program

           20.1.2.5.3    Selecting the panel of Consulting
                         Teachers




                   102                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
20.1.2.5.4    Developing and providing inservice
              training for Panel members and
              Consulting Teachers shall be done
              jointly by the Association and the
              District

20.1.2.5.5    Notifying in writing the Referred
              Participating Teacher, Consulting
              Teacher and site principal of their
              participation in the PAR Program

20.1.2.5.6    Making available the list of the panel
              of Consulting Teachers to the
              Participating Teacher

20.1.2.5.7    Sending a copy of the adopted Rules
              of Procedure to any bargaining unit
              member or administrator upon
              request

20.1.2.5.8    Establishing    a   procedure    for
              application as a Consulting Teacher

20.1.2.5.9    Determining     the    number     of
              Consulting Teachers in any school
              year, based upon participation in
              PAR Program, the budget available
              and other relevant considerations

20.1.2.5.10 Make recommendations to the
            Governing Board through the
            Superintendent no later than May
            regarding referred participants in the
            program including forwarding the
            names of teachers who, after one (1)
            year of sustained assistance, have
            not     demonstrated       satisfactory
            performance.     The Panel, based
            upon extenuating circumstances,
            may recommend to the Board of
            Education         through           the
            Superintendent an extension of this
            period of time.

20.1.2.5.11 Evaluating annually the impact of the
            PAR Program in order to improve the



        103                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                         program and remit a written Report
                         of their findings to the Board and
                         Association

           20.1.2.5.12 Developing all Application Forms for
                       the   Consulting     Teachers    and
                       Voluntary Participating Teachers

           20.1.2.5.13 Developing all Consulting Teacher
                       and Peer Review Panel Report
                       Forms

20.1.2.6   All panel proceedings and materials related to
           personal     matters     shall   be     confidential.
           Conversations        and       supporting       data
           collected/generated by the Consulting Teacher
           shall not be used in the evaluator's final evaluation
           of the Referred Participating Teacher.

20.1.2.7   Panel Members and Consulting Teachers
           shall be provided the same liability coverage
           contained in the Education Code and Government
           Code as provided to administrators and others
           acting on behalf of the District. This includes
           District-paid legal defense and settlement awards,
           if any. If a conflict of interest exists between the
           Panel Member or Consulting Teacher and the
           District, the Panel Member or Consulting Teacher
           may select his/her own attorney. The District shall
           pay reasonable and necessary legal costs and
           fees in such actions.

20.1.2.8   Members of the Panel shall be provided
           reasonable release time for performing duties
           which require them to visit classrooms and/or for
           inservice training. If inservice training takes place
           outside of work hours, these teachers shall be
           paid their daily or prorated per diem rate of pay.

20.1.2.9   Functions performed pursuant to this Article
           by bargaining unit employees shall not constitute
           either management or supervisory functions.




                   104                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
20.1.3   Participating Teachers

         20.1.3.1    Permanent classroom teachers, who receive
                     an unsatisfactory evaluation, shall be referred to
                     and shall participate in the Peer Assistance and
                     Review Program. For the purposes of this Article,
                     an unsatisfactory evaluation is defined as three (3)
                     or more boxes checked in column 3
                     (unsatisfactory) for sections 1.0-4.0 of the current
                     evaluation form.

         20.1.3.2    Other permanent classroom teachers may
                     volunteer at any time to participate. Participation
                     by a Volunteer Participating Teacher shall be kept
                     confidential except on a needs-to-know basis. A
                     Volunteer Participating Teacher may discontinue
                     his or her participation in this program at any time.
                     A Volunteer Participating Teacher's participation is
                     for peer assistance only and shall not continue for
                     more than one school year or the balance thereof.
                     The Consulting Teacher shall not participate in the
                     evaluation of the Volunteer Participating Teacher.
                     The Panel shall review Volunteer Participating
                     Teacher applications to approve participating in
                     the Program or refer them to the District for
                     consideration to participate in another District-
                     approved program.

         20.1.3.3    A Referred Participating Teacher may prioritize up
                     to three Consulting Teacher choices from a panel
                     of available Consulting Teachers. The Panel shall
                     assign a Consulting Teacher from this list in the
                     order of the Referred Participating Teacher
                     preference as the Consulting Teacher selections
                     are available. The Referred Participating Teacher
                     may appeal to the Panel for a different Consulting
                     Teacher.

         20.1.3.4    The Referred Participating Teacher has the right
                     to be represented at all formal conferences and
                     meetings.

         20.1.3.5    All Participating Teachers shall receive up to $250
                     reimbursement for instructional supplies and
                     materials for participation in the Program with the
                     concurrence of the Consulting Teacher.



                             105                     SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
20.1.4   Consulting Teacher

         20.1.4.1     A    Consulting Teacher is a teacher who
                      provides assistance to a Participating Teacher
                      pursuant to the PAR Program. The qualifications
                      for the Consulting Teacher shall be set forth in
                      the Rules of Procedure, provided that the
                      following shall constitute the minimum set of
                      qualifications:

               20.1.4.1.1     A Consulting Teacher shall be a
                              classroom teacher with permanent status.

               20.1.4.1.2     A Consulting Teacher shall have held at
                              least a clear California teaching credential
                              for at least three (3) years.

               20.1.4.1.3     A Consulting Teacher shall have at least
                              five (5) years' classroom teaching
                              experience in SAUSD.

               20.1.4.1.4     A Consulting Teacher shall demonstrate
                              exemplary teaching ability, as indicated
                              by, among other things, effective
                              communication skills, subject matter
                              knowledge, and mastery of a range of
                              teaching strategies necessary to meet the
                              needs of pupils in different contexts.

         20.1.4.2    In filling a position of Consulting Teacher, each
                     applicant is required to submit three (3)
                     references.

         20.1.4.3    Applications and references shall be treated with
                     confidentiality.

         20.1.4.4    Consulting Teachers shall be selected by a
                     majority vote of the Panel after candidates have
                     had classroom observations by the Panel.

         20.1.4.5    A     Consulting Teacher shall be provided
                     reasonable release time.       The term of the
                     Consulting Teacher shall be three (3) years. In
                     the first two (2) years of the PAR Program, the



                              106                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
           Panel may choose to stagger the length of the
           initial Consulting Teacher terms.

20.1.4.6   Functions performed pursuant to this Article
           by bargaining unit employees shall not constitute
           either management or supervisory functions. The
           Consulting Teacher shall be entitled to all rights of
           bargaining unit members.

20.1.4.7   The Consulting Teacher shall assist a
           Participating    Teacher     by       demonstrating,
           observing, coaching, conferencing, and referring
           to other activities which, in their professional
           judgment, shall assist the Participating Teacher.

           20.1.4.7.1    During the school year a Consulting
                         Teacher can be either assigned to
                         not more than one (1) Referred
                         Participating Teacher or up to two (2)
                         Volunteer Participating Teachers.

           20.1.4.7.2    A Consulting Teacher who is
                         assigned a Referred Participating
                         Teacher will receive a stipend of
                         $4,000.

           20.1.4.7.3    Consulting Teachers who are
                         assigned to Volunteer Participating
                         Teachers will receive a stipend of
                         $2,000 per Volunteer Participating
                         Teacher.
           20.1.4.7.4    Consulting Teachers who provide
                         services for less than a full year shall
                         have     their    stipends     prorated
                         accordingly.

           20.1.4.7.5    A Consulting Teacher who is
                         approved but not assigned to a
                         Participating Teacher shall be
                         referred for consideration of other
                         teacher support activities determined
                         by    the    Joint   committee     as
                         established in the Memorandum of
                         Understanding.




                   107                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
20.1.4.8    Consulting Teachers shall be reimbursed for all
            reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in
            the performance of their duties directly related to
            the PAR Program.

20.1.4.9    The Consulting Teacher shall meet with the
            Referred Participating Teacher and the evaluator
            of the Referred Participating Teacher to receive
            and discuss the Referred Participating Teacher's
            previously-established performance objectives as
            per Article V, section 5.1.1 and 5.1.2 of the
            SAEA/SAUSD contract.

20.1.4.10   The Consulting Teacher shall conduct multiple
            observations of the Participating Teacher during
            classroom instruction and shall have both pre-
            observation and post-observation conferences.

20.1.4.11   The Consulting Teacher shall monitor the
            progress of the Referred Participating Teacher
            and shall submit to, and discuss with, the Referred
            Participating Teacher at least two (2) written
            Reports.

20.1.4.12   Consulting Teacher shall prepare a Final Peer
            Review Report on the Referred Participating
            Teacher he/she assists. This Report shall be
            submitted to the Peer Review Panel, the
            designated evaluator of the Participating Teacher,
            and the Participating Teacher. The Referred
            Participating Teacher may attach a written
            response to the Consulting Teacher's Report and
            request a meeting with the Peer Review Panel to
            discuss the Report within 20 duty days. The
            Referred Participating Teacher has the right to an
            Association representative of his or her choice at
            this meeting. A copy of the Consulting Teacher's
            Report shall be submitted to, and discussed with,
            the Referred Participating Teacher to receive his
            or her signature before it is submitted to the
            Panel. The Participating Teacher's signing of the
            Report does not necessarily mean agreement, but
            rather that he or she has received a copy of the
            Report.




                    108                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
          20.1.4.13   The Final Report of the Referred Participating
                      Teacher's participation in the PAR Program shall
                      be made available for placement in his or her
                      personnel file and may be used as part of the
                      evaluation of the Referred Participating Teacher
                      conducted during participation in the program.

          20.1.4.14   Consulting Teachers shall be provided reasonable
                      release time for performing duties which require
                      them to visit classroom and/or for inservice
                      training. If inservice training takes place outside of
                      work hours, these teachers shall be paid their
                      daily or prorated per diem rate of pay.

         20.1.4.15    A cooperative relationship between the consulting
                      teacher and the principal shall be expected and
                      strongly encouraged by the Association and the
                      District. The designated evaluator shall retain the
                      responsibility for the evaluation.

20.1.5   Related Matters

         20.1.5.1     Peer Assistance and Review Budget

               20.1.5.1.1    The Peer Review Panel shall develop and
               recommend a budget to the Governing Board through the
               Superintendent or through the regular budget
               development process.

               20.1.5.1.2    This article shall be in compliance with the
               Education Code requirements covering Peer Assistance
               and Review programs.

20.1.6   Joint Committee

         20.1.6.1 The Santa Ana Education Association (SAEA) and
                     the Santa Ana Unified School District (SAUSD)
                     shall through a committee comprised of four
                     (4) members appointed by SAEA and four (4)
                     members appointed by SAUSD:

         20.1.6.2     Develop new teacher training and support
                      programs pursuant to Education Code section
                      44506(c)(5). (Assembly Bill No 1x, First
                      Extraordinary Session, 1999)




                              109                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
  20.1.6.3     Develop professional development for all
               teachers pursuant to Education Code section
               44506(c)(4). (Assembly Bill No. IX, First
               Extraordinary Session, 1999)

  20.1.6.4     The SAEA and the District shall also jointly
               develop a budget annually utilizing the AB IX
               funding not budgeted for the Peer Assistance and
               Review Program, to develop and implement new
               teacher training and support programs and staff
               development for all teachers.

  20.1.6.5     Such    programs    and     budget    shall   be
               recommended to the Governing Board for
               consideration and adoption pursuant to its annual
               budgeting process.

  20.1.6.6     SAEA appointees shall receive $200 for each
               meeting attended.      Meetings shall occur
               outside the normal duty day. The parties agree
               to evaluate this process and pay arrangement
               on an annual basis and make adjustments
               accordingly, to meet the needs of the PAR
               program and joint committee members.

20.1.7   Peer Assistance and Review Implementation

  The Peer Assistance and Review Program, as a replacement
  for the Mentor Teacher Program and as found in the negotiated
  agreement between the District and the Association, is intended
  to provide peer assistance to tenured participating teachers
  who are referred for unsatisfactory performance or who have
  volunteered. The Consulting teacher's role shall not replace or
  in any way erode the responsibility of the principal or assistant
  principal as evaluators as described in the Stull Act. The statute
  does not permit the Consulting Teacher or the PAR Panel to
  evaluate the Participating Teacher. Under the statute the
  District maintains the responsibility to evaluate teachers. This
  remains the role of the principal/assistant principal as
  evaluators.


                  ARTICLE XXI

             21.0 CONTRACT WAIVER




                        110                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
21.1.1 The principal or site representative must inform District Management
       and the Association of the waiver proposal on the Site Contract
       Waiver Proposal Form which is included in the Appendix of the CBA.


21.1.2 Waiver proposals with an accompanying ballot and balloting
       procedure must be approved by the Association and the District.

      21.1.2.1     The balloting procedure must provide for the following
                   provisions:

                      a) Site Name
                      b) Secret Ballots
                      c) Neutral Ballot Counting
                      d) Secure Ballot Storage
                      e) On and Off Track Voting
                      f) Vacancy Notice Advertisements

21.1.3 Waivers are approved with 70% + 1 of the affected Unit Members
       voting “Yes”.

21.1.4 Affected Unit Members are those assigned to the site for the time
       period covered by the site waiver.

21.1.5 If a site wishes to continue an existing waiver, it must follow the
       procedures listed above.

21.1.6 If the waiver is approved, transfer priority shall be given to the unit
       members who are adversely affected by the waiver. No unit member
       shall be asked to leave the site or retaliated against in any manner
       as a result of their support or opposition to a waiver or waiver
       proposal.

21.1.7 Contract Waivers may only be sought on provisions of the CBA
       contained in Article VIII: Hours of Work.




21.1.8 Meetings held “in lieu of” staff development days and regularly
       scheduled meetings, as allowed by contract may take place without
       the need of a waiver as long as no additional time is required of unit



                                     111                   SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
members beyond that which is mandated by provisions of the Hours
of Work Article of the CBA. Sites making use of this provision shall
notify the District and the Association in writing prior to the
beginning of each school year this plan is implemented.




                       ARTICLE XXII

            22.0 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



                            112                   SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
22.1   Within thirty (30) duty days of ratification of the Agreement by both
       parties herein, the District shall have sufficient copies prepared and
       delivered to the sites for distribution to each unit member in the District.
       The cost shall be equally shared by the District and the Association.

22.2   Effect of the Agreement

       22.2.1   The District shall not reduce or eliminate any current District
                Office procedures, Board Policies, or Administrative
                Regulations on items that are within the scope of
                representation as defined by Chapter 10.7, Section 3543.2 of
                the Government Code and final PERB decisions, that would
                adversely affect a unit member unless previously discussed
                with the Association or otherwise provided by the express terms
                of this Agreement.

       22.2.2   The Association and the District agree that the Agreement is
                intended to cover all matters relating to wages, hours and all
                other terms and conditions of employment and that during the
                term of the Agreement neither the District nor the Association
                will be required to meet and negotiate on any further matters
                affecting these or any other subjects not specifically set forth in
                this Agreement, unless there is mutual agreement to reopen
                negotiations on any topic, even though such subjects or matters
                may not have been within the knowledge or contemplation of
                either or both the District or the Association at the time they met
                and negotiated on and executed the Agreement, or even
                though such subjects or matters were proposed and later
                withdrawn.

22.3   Separability and Savings

       22.3.1   If any provisions of this Agreement should be held invalid by
                operation of law, by the Public Employment Relations Board, by
                the highest court of the State or by a Federal court pending a
                final determination as to its validity, the remainder of this
                Agreement or the application of such Article or section as to
                persons or circumstances other than those as to which it has
                been held invalid or as to which compliance with or
                enforcement of has been restrained, shall not be affected
                thereby.

       22.3.2   If any such decision or change in law occurs, the parties hereto
                shall, upon request within forty (40) duty days, commence
                meeting and negotiating with respect to the means of



                                       113                    SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                  compliance therewith, if either party deems it necessary to
                  renegotiate and requests such in writing.

22.4   Conflict

       22.4.1     In the event a conflict between the terms of this Agreement and
                  any Board policies, procedures, or individual contracts of
                  employment, the terms of this Agreement shall prevail.

       22.4.2     In the event of a conflict between the terms of this Agreement
                  and any provisions of the Education Code or Title V of the
                  Administrative Code, the law shall prevail.

22.5   Application

       22.5.1     The District and the Association shall apply the provisions
                  of this Agreement (CBA) to all unit members without regard
                  to race, color, creed, age, national origin, gender, disability,
                  sexual orientation, political affiliation, marital status,
                  primary language, exercise of rights provided by this
                  Agreement, and/or membership and/or participation in
                  activities of the Association unless authorized by a
                  provision of this Agreement (CBA).

       22.5.2     Alleged violations of 22.5.1 may be challenged pursuant to
                  the Grievance Procedure (Article VI) or pursuant to the
                  complaint procedures established by State and Federal
                  agencies, such as DFEH or EEOC.

 Unit members alleging violations under 22.5.1 above must elect to pursue
their claim(s) pursuant to the Arbitration procedures outlined in the CBA or
  pursuant to the complaint procedures established by State and Federal
               agencies, such as DFEH or EEOC, but not both.
                                ARTICLE XXIII

                           23.0 RETIRED TEACHERS

23.1   The following provisions are pertaining to retired teachers employed as
       necessary for the implementation of the 20-to-1 Class Size Reduction
       Program:

       23.1.1     Salary shall be based on Class III, Step 5.

       23.1.2     Health and Welfare Benefits: Retirees employed pursuant to
                  this Article may purchase all or part of the District-offered



                                       114                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
         benefit programs at an annual cost of the District's benefits
         package, except where IN6.2 applies.

23.1.3   Each year of service under the 20-to-1 Class Size Reduction
         Program shall be added to years of prior Santa Ana Unified
         School District service to determine eligibility for continued
         District retiree health benefits as provided in Administrative
         Regulation      (AR)   4117.15/4217.15/4317/15,     Retirement
         Procedures/Qualifications.

23.1.4   Evaluation Procedures: A minimum of two observations and
         one evaluation shall be provided per year.

23.1.5   Transfer/Reassignment: Voluntary transfer or reassignment
         shall be limited to positions resulting from 20-to-1 Class Size
         Reduction.

23.1.6   Grievance Procedure: A retired teacher may grieve all
         provisions as modified herein and the balance of the contract.

23.1.7   Wages and Wage Provisions: The step and column and other
         provisions of Article VII shall not apply to retired teachers.

23.1.8   Employed retired teachers shall receive compensation for
         participation in the buy-back (staff development) program.




                              115                   SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                                        ARTICLE XXIV

                              24.0 YEAR-ROUND SCHOOLS

24.1   In order to facilitate the essential tasks necessary for on- and off-cycle classroom
       preparation, it is the intent of the District and the Association that each unit member
       at multi-track year-round schools shall be provided materials that are compatible with
       roving and rotating.

24.2   Moving Furniture and Materials

       24.2.1   The District shall move all furniture and supplies for the outgoing and
                incoming teachers.

       24.2.2   Additional plastic, transparent, stackable boxes shall be made available by
                the District to each rotating or roving teacher at the request of the principal.

       24.2.3   A cargo storage container shall be made available at each site at the
                request of the principal.

       24.2.4   All materials and furniture shall be in the teacher's room before the start of
                the first duty day of the trimester.

       24.2.5   Teachers shall review materials to be stored and shall be reasonable in
                determining what is retained for storage.

       24.2.6   Teachers may supply a map or diagram to facilitate room organization when
                returning from off cycle.

24.3   The District shall provide clean classrooms and clean furniture before the start of the
       incoming teacher's first duty day of the trimester.

24.4   Availability of Texts and Supplies

       24.4.1   Orders shall be placed as early as necessary each year in order to have
                textbooks and supplemental materials in the schools prior to the beginning
                of the first cycle of the school year.

       24.4.2   All necessary instructional materials, supplies and textbooks shall be in the
                classroom before the start of the first duty day.

24.5   The Year-Round Schools Committee shall continue to meet quarterly (or more often
       by mutual agreement) for discussion, research and to be a resource in the resolution
       of year-round school issues.

24.6   Unit members and administrators at Year-Round Schools and those planning to
       move to a Year-Round Calendar status shall collaboratively develop and
       maintain a roving/rotating plan specific to their sites.



                                            116                            SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
       24.6.1   No Unit Member new to the teaching profession shall be permitted to
                rove during his/her first year of teaching.

       24.6.2   No Unit Member shall be required to rove a second (third, fourth, etc.)
                time at their site until all eligible Unit Members at their grade level or
                within their department have roved.

       24.6.3   Unit Members who have been provided a District approved
                “reasonable accommodation” due to a disability shall not be required
                to rove.

24.7   Year-round school principals will inform their teachers who want to substitute during
       their off cycle to submit their names to the site principal and indicate if they want to
       be on the priority list for a specific school or for all schools.

24.8   Each team of four Year-round Rotating, Roving, and Sharing teachers may choose
       one of the following scenarios:

       24.8.1 Each of the four teachers sharing three classrooms in a rotating arrangement
              shall be compensated $250 ($1,000 per team) per year.

       24.8.2 One of the four teachers who agrees to be a rover shall be compensated
              $700. The three (3) teachers who share their rooms with the rover will be
              compensated $100 per year.

       24.8.3 Rotating, roving, and sharing teachers will not be required to attend meetings
              for more than ninety minutes on any duty day they return from off cycle.




                                             117                           SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                                          ARTICLE XXV

                     25.0 BEGINNING TEACHER INCENTIVE FUNDING

25.1   Fully credentialed teachers employed on December 31, 2000, and serving in the
       following hard-to-fill positions shall receive an annual stipend of $800 beginning with
       the 2000-2001 school year.

       25.1.1   Special Education including speech and language specialists and adapted
                P.E. teachers providing service pursuant to IEPs.

       25.1.2   Secondary math and science.

25.2   Proration of the $800 shall be as follows:

       Intermediate

                4 or more qualifying periods ………………………..100%
                3 qualifying periods         ................................... 75%
                2 qualifying periods         ................................... 50%
                1 qualifying period          ................................... 25%

       High School

                3 qualifying periods               ................................. 100%
                2 qualifying periods               ................................... 67%
                1 qualifying period                ................................... 33%

       Elementary Special Education

                75% of the instructional day 100%
                50% of the instructional day 67%
                Less than 50% of the instructional day...................... 50%

25.3   Proration shall also be based upon the portion of the school year worked. If a
       teacher works more than one semester, $800 shall be paid. If a teacher works less
       than a semester, $400 shall be provided. Current employees without a credential
       and current fully-credentialed employees who agree to obtain a credential qualifying
       them for a hard-to-fill position shall receive upon completion of the credential the
       $800 stipend if assigned to a hard-to-fill position.

25.4   Current employees who possess a credential qualifying them for a hard-to-fill position
       but are not assigned to a hard-to-fill position shall receive the stipend in item 5 below
       if they transfer to a hard-to-fill position.

                                         ARTICLE XXVI

                           26.0 HIGH SCHOOL EXTENDED DAY



                                                118                                      SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
26.1   High School Extended Day is the term used in this Collective Bargaining Agreement
       to describe the addition of an additional class period mandated for specific groups of
       SAUSD high school students.

       a.       Full-time teachers at the high school are those who teach five (5) classes
                with one (1) conference period.

       b.       Overload teachers at the high school are those who teach six (6) classes
                with no conference period.

       c.       Extended Day teachers at the high school are those who teach six (6)
                classes with one (1) conference period.

26.2   The student instructional schedule may be increased by one period immediately
       before and/or after the instructional day during the 2002-03 school year at each
       comprehensive high school.

       26.2.1   Teachers who participate in this modification (teach 6 periods with a
                conference period) do so on a voluntary basis. Teachers who choose not
                to participate shall not experience reprisals.

       26.2.2   The District shall not be arbitrary or capricious in the implementation of the
                High School Extended Day.

26.3   Unit members may volunteer for only one period before or after the existing schedule.

       26.3.1   Unit members who choose to participate shall specify their preference and
                availability for before school, after school, or both.

26.4   Unit members who volunteer for before or after standard-day high school classes
       shall receive 1/6 of their contracted salary and shall receive the same rate of pay for
       all authorized paid absences.

       26.4.1   Unit members who substitute for the additional period shall be paid at
                Factor E, Class II, step 5.

       26.4.2   Unit members and Santa Ana Unified School District Retirees who
                substitute for a day in an Extended Day high school shall receive an
                additional 1/6 of their regular substitute pay.

26.5   Volunteers shall receive two (2) days' additional accumulative sick leave per year or a
       proration thereof.

       26.5.1   1.0 sick days shall cover an extended day.

26.6   All compensation earned by volunteers including substitute volunteers shall be
       included in STRS calculation in accordance with any applicable legislation.

26.7   SAEA representatives and SAUSD personnel shall meet and consult no less than
       every two months. The committee shall be established by June 15, 2001, and shall

                                            119                           SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
       study and recommend prioritized alternatives for assigning teachers to teach a longer
       instructional day for comprehensive high school students.

       26.7.1   The committee shall consist of the following:

                26.7.1.1      Two (2) teachers from each of the comprehensive high
                              schools, selected by the Association.

                26.7.1.2      One (1) teacher from a high school alternative education site,
                              selected by the Association.

                26.7.1.3      Each comprehensive high school principal or designee.

                26.7.1.4      District Chief Academic Officer (ex officio)

                26.7.1.5      Association Executive Director (ex officio)

                26.7.1.6      Association President (ex officio)

       26.7.2   Consultations shall include:

                26.7.2.1      Student Curriculum

                26.7.2.2      Student and teacher scheduling

                26.7.2.3      Materials and Supplies

                26.7.2.4      Class size

                26.7.2.5      Other issues related to high school exit exams and District
                              graduation requirements.

       26.7.3   A report of the meetings shall be provided to both SAEA and SAUSD.

       26.7.4   A yearly review of the impact of the Extended Day program shall be
                conducted by the Consultation Committee. Information to be reviewed shall
                include, among other items of information, test scores, attendance features
                and teacher, student, and parent surveys. This information shall be
                reported to SAEA and SAUSD.

26.8   Selection of volunteers shall be based upon the following criteria:

       26.8.1   Appropriate credential/certification.

       26.8.2   Legal requirements.

       26.8.3   Experience within the last five (5) years teaching in methods, techniques or
                programs as publicized in the tentative position openings for a specific site.

       26.8.4   Subject area experience.

                                               120                           SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
       26.8.5    Grade level experience.

       26.8.6    Educationally-related needs of the District and/or schools as publicized in
                 the tentative position openings for a specific site.

       When two or more equally qualified unit members apply, seniority in the District shall
       govern.

26.9   All volunteers shall be employed subject to contingency of sustained enrollment of
       students. Extended Day personnel shall be limited first to unit members currently
       employed at the site, then the District may seek candidates employed at other District
       sites, and then employees not currently employed by SAUSD.

26.10 Tentative position openings for teachers shall be adequately publicized by the District
      with postings of such positions in all schools within ten (10) days of the approval of
      each opening. Unit members' applications shall be submitted within ten (10) duty
      days of the date of the posting deadline for the Extended Day positions. Tentative
      selection and notification of candidates shall occur within twenty (20) duty days of the
      close of applications, but no later than five (5) calendar days before the end of the
      school year.

26.11 Appropriate support personnel, e.g., Counselors, Psychologists, Nurses, etc., shall
      be available during the Extended Day.

26.12 Security personnel shall be available during the Extended Day.

26.13 Class size provisions as enumerated in Article 9 of this Agreement shall apply to
      Extended Day.




                                             121                          SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
       APPENDIX A



                                           SANTA ANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

                                           SCHEDULE OF SALARIES FOR TEACHERS

                                                          2004-2005

          Step        Class I    Class I     Class II   Class II   Class III   Class III    Class IV   Class V
                                 w/Cred.     BA+24      w/Cred.    BA+45       w/Cred.        MA         DR
            1         38,706      40,980      38,706     40,980     39,526      40,980       42,108    42,588
            2         38,706      40,980      38,879     40,980     41,501                   44,007    44,487
            3         38,706      40,980      40,821     40,980     43,577                   45,986    46,466
            4         38706       40,980      42,866                45,755                   48,056    48,536
            5         40,452      40,980      45,010                48,041                   50,219    50,699
            6         42,270      40,980      47,259                50,442                   52,480    52,960
            7         44,172      40,980      49,623                52,963                   54,838    55,318
            8                                 52,106                55,609                   57,306    57,786
            9                                 54,708                58,392                   59,885    60,365
           10                                 57,440                61,311                   62,580    63,060
           11                                                       64,380                   65,399    65,879
           12                                                                                68,378    68,858
           16                                                                                72,314    72,794
           21                                                                                77,493    77,973
          26/31                                                                              79,404    79,884

       NOTE:      $40,980 is designated beginning salary for teachers who have completed credential requirements.

                             1.5% for three mandatory staff development days




       Effective: July 1, 2004
       Adopted: March 23, 2004
       SCHEDULE OF SALARIES FOR TEACHERS
       2004-2005 SCHOOL YEAR

Dept. Chair Factors                   Factors                 Bilingual Stipends           ROP-Subs
                                                             122                                SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
(2-5) 46885.00                   (2-5) 46885.00           (2-5) 46885.00Factor B $32.585

.010    469.00                   A–29.303                 1%     =      469.00      ROP-Hourly
.015    703.00                   B–32.585                 1.7%   =      797.00      Factor D $39.055
.017    797.00                   C–35.867                 3%     =     1407.00
.020    938.00                   D–39.055                 5%     =     2344.00      Extended Yr. Serv.
.025   1172.00                   E–42.430                                           Class & step x.000833
.030   1407.00                   F–45.712
.035   1641.00
.040   1875.00                       Home Teacher                    Grade Level Leaders
.045   2110.00                       (2-5) 46885.00                  (.005 of 2-5) 46885.00
.050   2344.00                       (525 hrs. per yr.)              $234.00/yr.
.055   2579.00
                                      st    nd
.060   2813.00                       1 & 2 –32.209                   Elementary Supervision
                                      rd  th
                                     3 & 4 –35.491                   (.000444 of 2-5) 46885.00
  th                                  th  th
10 Grade Counseling                  5 & 6 –38.773                   $20.82/hr.
                                      th
Factor C $35.867                     7      –42.055

Detention SupervisionSaturday Work Saturday School
Factor A $29.303                   Factor A $29.303                  Factor C $35.867

District Sports Scheduler            Academic Coaches                Athletic Trainer/Athletic Director
(3% of 3-7) 55170.00(.050 of 3-7) 55170.00                           (6% of 3-8x3 seasons) 57926.00
$1655.00/yr.                         $2759.00/yr.                    3475.56x3=$10427.00
$828./semester                       $1379.25/semester

       (All sports based on 11 weeks)

       Intermediate Sports (3-7) 55170.00                            Athletic Sports Coord.
       5% HEAD $2758.50–$250.77/wk.                                  (.020 of 3-7) 55170.00
       4% ASST $2206.80–$200.61/wk.                                  $1103.00/yr.
       3% INTRA $1655.10–$150.46/wk.

       High School Sports (3-8) 57926.00
       6% HEAD $3475.56–$315.96/wk. - (Football) & (Spring Football pay 3 wks. only)
       5% HEAD $2896.30–$263.30/wk. - (Reg/Head) & use for Asst. Football only
       4% ASST $2317.04–$210.64/wk.
       3% INTRA $1737.78–$157.98/wk.




       APPENDIX B


                                    SANTA ANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

                                      PSYCHOLOGIST SALARY SCHEDULE

                                                    2004-2005

                        STEP                 SALARY                  DOCTORATE

                                                          123                              SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
                          1            58,960               59,488
                          2            61,611               62,139
                          3            64,385               64,913
                          4            67,282               67,810
                          5            70,307               70,835
                          6            73,477               73,957
                          7            76,825               77,353


                          11           81,247               81,775
                          16           87,064               87,592




Effective: July 1, 2004
Adopted: March 23, 2004
APPENDIX C

                               SITE CONTRACT WAIVER PROPOSAL FORM

Date Submitted to District Office and Association:___________________________

Contract Paragraphs to Be Waivered: _____________________________________

Purpose of Waiver:




                                                124                             SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
        Additional Instructional Minutes (IM) Per Day: _________

        Additional IMs Per Week: ____________ Additional IMs Per Month: ____________

        Additional Called Meetings (CM) Per Week:____ Per Month:_____ Per Year:_____

        Length of CMs:______ Day(s) of CMs: ___________ Time(s) of CMs:___________

        Duration of Waiver (not to exceed one year) ___________

        Commencement of Waiver:______________ Conclusion of Waiver: ____________

        Comments (Rationale, Special Circumstances, Considerations):




        Site Administrator in Charge: __________________________/________________________
                                                Signature and Date                  Print Name

        Site SAEA Representative: ____________________________/________________________
                                               Signature and Date                 Print Name




                       Approved for Site Vote:     _____________________        _____________________
        _______________________
                                   For SAUSD                     For SAEA                      Date

        PLEASE CIRCLE YOUR RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION “Do you approve this waiver?”

                        YES                                                                    NO


                                                   APPENDIX D
                                              1 – EVALUATION PLAN

                                    SANTA ANA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
                                            EVALUATION PLAN

                                             SCHOOL YEAR: __________

        EMPLOYEE __________________ASSIGNMENT(S)_____________CYCLE _________

                 SCHOOL/DEPT. _________PERMANENT __________ NON-PERMANENT________
   INDICATE STANDARDS BEING ADDRESSED:              INDICATE ELEMENT BEING ADDRESSED:
   STANDARDS 1.0 - 5.0                              STANDARDS 6.0 Develops as a Professional Educator

 1.0 Engages and supports all students in
  learning.
                                                 6.1 Reflects on teaching practice and plans professional
                                                  development.

 2.0 Creates and maintains effective
  environments for students learning
                                                 to6.2grow
                                                         Establishes professional goals and pursues opportunities
                                                            professionally.


                                                           125                                 SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
 3.0  Understands and organizes subject matter  6.3 Works with communities to improve professional
  for student learning                            practice.

 4.0 Plans instruction and designs learning
  experiences for all students.
                                                   6.4 Works with families to improve professional practice.
 5.0 Assesses student learning.                   6.5 Works with colleagues to improve professional practice.
                                                   6.6 Balances professional responsibilities and
                                                    maintains motivation.
                         *************************************************************************
           Check Applicable CBA Paragraph Number:

                5.1.1.1 The evaluation of first year pre-intern/intern and emergency permit unit members, credentialed
           temporary and categorically funded unit members, and probationary unit members shall be based on two (2) of
           the first five (5) Standards and one (1) element of Standard 6: Develops as a Professional Educator.
               5.1.1.2 The evaluation of second or more years pre-intern/intern and emergency permit unit members,
           second and third year credentialed temporary and categorically funded unit members and second-year
           probationary unit member shall be based on the remaining three (3) Standards and one (1) element of Standard
           6: Develops as a Professional Educator.
               5.1.1.3 Every evaluation year, the evaluation of permanent and continuing credentialed temporary (three or
           more years in the District) unit members shall be based on three (3) of the Standards and one (1) element of
           Standard 6: Develops as a Professional Educator.


           5.1.2 Are Standards mutually Agreed Upon?               Yes   or     No
           5.1.2 Which standards are Administratively substituted? ________/________
           5.1.2.1 Will Unit Member be submitting constraints?     Yes   or     No
           ------------------------------------------------------------------------

           EVALUATOR SIGNATURE ____________________________________ DATE ______________
           EMPLOYEE SIGNATURE ______________________________________ DATE______________




                                                            126                                SAUSD/SAEA 2004-2007
